1
absence is the mother of disillusion A 
period of separation may enable you to 
consider people or things more objec-
tively and see them in a truer but less 
favorable light: While her boyfriend was away 
she became increasingly aware of all his little 
faults, which she had ignored when they were 
together—absence is the mother of disillusion. 
The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
absence makes the heart grow fonder 
Your affection for those close to you—
family and friends—increases when you 
are parted from them: “. . . meantime he 
exhorts me to the exercise of patience, 
‘that fi rst of woman’s virtues,’ and desires 
me to remember the saying, ‘Absence 
makes the heart grow fonder,’ and com-
fort myself with the assurance that the 
longer he stays away the better he shall 
love me when he returns” (Anne Brontë, 
Tenant of Wildfell Hall, 1848). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1850, but the senti-
ment is expressed in earlier literature—
for example, by James Howell 
(1593?–1666), who wrote “Distance 
some times endears friendship, and 
absence sweeteneth it.” Compare Sextus 
Propertius (c. 54 b.c.–a.d. 2), “semper in 
absentes felicior aestus amantes [passion is 
always warmer toward absent lovers].”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: out of sight, out of mind.
the absent are always in the wrong  See 
he who is absent is always in the 
wrong.
the absent are never without fault nor 
the present without excuse  See he 
who is absent is always in the wrong.
accidents will happen in the best-regu-
lated families  No matter how careful 
you are, you may still do something 
by accident or mistake; often used to 
console somebody who has done such a 
thing: “‘Copperfi eld,’ said Mr. Micawber, 
‘accidents will occur in the best-regulated 
families; and in families not regulated by 
. . . the infl uence of Woman, in the lofty 
character of Wife, they must be expected 
with confi dence, and must be borne with 
philosophy’” (Charles Dickens, David 
Copperfi eld, 1850). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in George Colman’s play Deuce 
Is in Him (1763) in the shorter form “acci-
dents will happen.”
Variant of this proverb: accidents 
will happen in the best of families.
accusing the times is but excusing our-
selves  People who seek to blame the 
a
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   1 1/29/07   5:12:15 PM
times or conditions they live in are really 
trying to avoid taking the blame them-
selves: It strikes me that the prime minister 
needs to be reminded that those who accuse the 
times are but excusing themselves. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1732 by Thomas 
Fuller in Gnomologia.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ings: he who excuses himself accuses 
himself.
action is worry’s worst enemy  You can 
banish anxiety by keeping busy and active, 
or by taking action to solve the problem 
that is worrying you: Action is worry’s worst 
enemy, so don’t just sit there brooding—do 
something!
actions speak louder than words  What 
you do is more important than what 
you say, or what you promise to do: 
“The gallant foreigner, who could not tell 
them how he sympathized with them, but 
whose actions spoke louder than words” 
(F. McCullagh, With the Cossacks, 1906). 
The fi rst recorded use of the proverb, in 
the form “actions are more precious than 
words,” was in a speech by the English 
politician John Pym in 1628. Its current 
form is of U.S. origin.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: deeds are fruits, words are but 
leaves.
action without thought is like shooting 
without aim  Think before you act in order 
to achieve the best results: Disregarding the 
proverb that action without thought is like shoot-
ing without aim, he went straight out and bought 
a computer that proved to be totally unsuitable 
for his needs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
look before you leap.
admiration is the daughter of ignorance 
People often admire others about whom 
they only have incomplete knowledge: 
The president’s current popularity only proves 
the rule that admiration is the daughter 
of ignorance. This U.S. proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1733–58 by Benjamin Frank-
lin in Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what the eye doesn’t see, the heart 
doesn’t grieve over.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: prejudice is the daughter of igno-
rance.
adventures are to the adventurous 
Those who are not bold, and who take 
no risks, will not have exciting lives 
or achieve spectacular things: “He told 
himself that adventure was to the adven-
turous. . . . If he could not make the 
effort for the small he would miss the big 
adventure” (Thomas Hinde, Mr. Nicholas, 
1952). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Benjamin Disraeli’s Coningsby (1844).
adversity makes strange bedfellows  In 
times of hardship or misfortune people 
often befriend or form alliances with those 
whose company they would normally avoid: 
The merger of the two companies surprised every-
body, but these are hard times for the industry and 
adversity makes strange bedfellows. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in Shakespeare’s play The 
Tempest (2:2) in the form “Misery acquaints a 
man with strange bedfellows.”
Variants of this proverb: misery 
makes strange bedfellows; poverty makes 
strange bedfellows.
after a storm comes a calm  A period 
of anger or trouble is usually followed 
by a period of relative peace: “After a 
action is worry’s worst enemy
2
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   2 1/29/07   5:12:15 PM
3
storm comes a calm. Wearied with a for-
mer blustering they began now to repose 
themselves in a sad silence” (Thomas 
Fuller, Church History of Britain, 1655). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1582, but the sentiment it expresses is 
found in writing more than 200 years ear-
lier. It has given rise to the cliché the calm 
before the storm, which reverses the order 
of things and describes a period of peace 
before an upheaval.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the darkest hour is just before 
dawn; when things are at the worst 
they begin to mend.
after death the doctor Help sometimes 
comes too late: “All his tricks founder, and 
he brings his physic/After his patient’s death: 
the King already/Hath married the fair lady” 
(William Shakespeare, Henry VIII, 3:2). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1385–90 by 
Geoffrey Chaucer in Troilus and Criseyde.
after dinner rest awhile, after supper 
walk a mile  It is best for the digestion 
ååååå after dinner rest awhile, after supper walk a mile
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   3 1/29/07   5:12:15 PM
4
to rest after a heavy meal and take some 
exercise after a light meal: “As the prov-
erb says, for health sake, after dinner, or 
rather after supper, willingly then I’ll walk 
a mile to hear thee” (Philip Massinger, The 
Unnatural Combat, 1639). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1582 in a slightly differ-
ent form, with talk in place of rest.
Variant of this proverb: after dinner 
sit awhile, after supper walk a mile.
age before beauty  Older people have 
precedence over those who are younger 
and more attractive; said when standing 
back to let another person go fi rst or 
when pushing in ahead of somebody: “Age 
before beauty,” she said as she stepped in front of 
the young woman at the head of the line. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1843. Face-
tious retorts or extensions to the proverb 
include “Beauty before the beast,” “Grace 
before meat,” and “Pearls before swine.”
the age of miracles is past  Miracles no 
longer happen; used when some desirable 
occurrence seems highly unlikely: I didn’t 
expect the authorities to take any action in 
response to my complaint—the age of miracles 
is past. The proverb occurs in Shakespeare’s 
play All’s Well that Ends Well (2:3) in the form 
“They say miracles are past,” which implies 
that it is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: wonders will never cease!
agree, for the law is costly  It is expen-
sive to settle disputes in court because of 
the legal costs involved: “Come, agree, 
agree; the law’s costly” (Jonathan Swift, 
A Complete Collection of Polite and Ingenious 
Conversation, 1738). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1605 by William Camden in 
Remains Concerning Britain.
alcohol will preserve anything but a 
secret  People have a tendency to talk too 
freely and become indiscreet when they 
are drunk: I hoped that he would not have too 
much to drink at the reception—I had told him 
about Kate’s pregnancy in confi dence, and it’s 
well known that alcohol will preserve anything 
but a secret. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: drunkenness reveals what soberness 
conceals; there’s truth in wine.
all animals are equal, but some are more 
equal than others  In a society or orga-
nization where all are supposedly equal, it 
is often the case that some have special privi-
leges, or greater power than others: “Thus, 
even on the night of such personal triumph, 
Jason Gilbert was once again reminded 
that although all Harvard undergraduates 
are equal, some are more equal than oth-
ers” (Erich Segal, The Class, 1985). Other 
words may be substituted for animals, as 
in the above quotation. The proverb comes 
from George Orwell’s novel Animal Farm 
(1945), where it is the ultimate slogan of a 
supposedly egalitarian regime set up by the 
animals of a farm, which gradually becomes 
as tyrannical as the human one it replaced.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
all men are created equal.
all arts are brothers, each is a light to 
the other  The arts should not be con-
sidered as separate entities but as parts 
of one whole, each complementing and 
leading to a better understanding and 
appreciation of the others: Looking at a 
great painting can move me in the same way 
as listening to a fi ne piece of music—they say 
all arts are brothers. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1847.
age before beauty
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   4 1/29/07   5:12:15 PM
5
Variant of this proverb: all arts are 
one, all branches on one tree.
all bad things come in threes  See 
things come in threes.
all cats are gray in the dark  People 
have no distinguishing features, and their 
appearance becomes unimportant, in the 
dark; sometimes used with reference to 
a person’s choice of sexual partner: “You 
forgot that all cats are grey in the dark and 
so are uniformed policemen” (Jonathan 
Ross, Dark Blue and Dangerous, 1981). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1596. It was used with sexual con-
notations in a letter written by Benjamin 
Franklin in 1745: “And as in the dark all 
Cats are grey, the Pleasure of corporal 
Enjoyment with an old Woman is at least 
equal, and frequently superior.”
Variants of this proverb: all cats are 
black at night; at night all cats are gray.
all chiefs and no Indians  See too many 
chiefs and not enough indians.
all commend patience, but none can 
endure to suffer  It is far easier to tell 
somebody else to be patient than to be 
patient yourself: She said I should wait and 
see, but it was diffi cult to take her advice—all 
commend patience, but none can endure to 
suffer. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1948 in a U.S. proverb collection.
all fi sh are not caught with fl ies  In 
some circumstances different methods 
must be employed to achieve a desired 
end: The old man grinned and said something 
about all fi sh not being caught with fl ies. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1580 by 
John Lyly in Euphues and his England.
all good things come in threes  See 
things come in threes.
all good things come to those who 
wait  See all things come to those 
who wait.
all good things must come to an 
end  Nothing lasts forever; often said 
resignedly when a pleasant experience 
or sequence of events fi nally ends: We 
had had a wonderful vacation, but all good 
things must come to an end. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1440: “Ye wote wele 
of all thing moste be an ende” (Partonope 
of Blois). The word good was probably 
not added until the 19th or early 20th 
century.
all is fi sh that comes to the net  Anything 
that comes along is accepted and turned to 
advantage: “I don’t know that she cares for 
one more than the other. There are a cou-
ple of young Air Force chaps too. I fancy 
all’s fi sh that comes to her net at present” 
(Agatha Christie, Murder in Mesopotamia, 
1936). First recorded c. 1520, the proverb 
is sometimes applied to a particular person 
by substituting my, his, her, and so on for the, 
as in this example.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
all is grist that comes to the mill.
all is grist that comes to the mill  Every-
thing, no matter how small or unpromis-
ing, can be put to use: She carried a notebook 
and pencil with her wherever she went—for a 
writer, all is grist that comes to the mill. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with slightly 
different wording, in 1655. It also occurs 
with my, his, her, and so on in place of the 
and in the fi gurative phrase grist to the mill, 
as in Charles Dickens’s novel A Tale of Two 
 all is grist that comes to the mill
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   5 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
6
Cities (1859): “The clearance was effected 
at last; the Stryver arrears were hand-
somely fetched up; everything was got 
rid of until November should come with 
its fogs atmospheric, and fogs legal, and 
bring grist to the mill again.” Grist is grain 
brought to a mill to be ground.
Variant of this proverb: it’s all grist 
for the mill.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
all is fish that comes to the net.
all is not gold that glitters  See all that 
glitters is not gold.
all lay loads on the willing horse  See 
the willing horse carries the load.
all men are created equal  No person 
is born superior or inferior to another, 
so all should have equal rights: “Colonel 
Cathcart was infused with the democratic 
spirit: he believed that all men were cre-
ated equal, and therefore spurned all men 
outside Group Headquarters with equal 
fervor” (Joseph Heller, Catch-22, 1955). 
The proverb comes from the Declara-
tion of Independence (1776), in which 
Thomas Jefferson wrote: “We hold these 
truths to be self-evident, that all men are 
created equal, that they are endowed by 
their Creator with certain unalienable 
Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, 
and the pursuit of Happiness.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: jack’s as good as his master; all 
animals are equal, but some are more 
equal than others.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: equality begins in the grave.
all roads lead to Rome  There are many 
different ways to achieve the same result, 
or to come to the same conclusion: “All 
roads lead to Rome: and even animal 
individuality throws a ray on human prob-
lems” (J. S. Huxley, The Individual in 
the Animal Kingdom, 1912). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in Chaucer’s Prologue to Astrolabe (c. 
1391). Compare the medieval Latin prov-
erb “Mille vie ducunt hominem per secula 
Romam [A thousand roads lead man for-
ever toward Rome].” In modern use other 
place-names are sometimes substituted 
for Rome.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: there are more ways of killing 
a cat than choking it with cream; 
there’s more than one way to skin 
a cat.
all’s fair in love and war  Any action, 
however mean or unscrupulous, is per-
missible in certain situations; often used 
to justify cheating or deception: “‘You 
opened the letter!’ . . . ‘How was I to read 
it if I hadn’t? All’s . . . fair in love and war, 
you know’” (Francis Edward Smedley, 
Frank Fairleigh, 1850). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
in 1620. In modern use an extra word is 
often added to or substituted for part of 
the proverb, as in “All’s fair in love—an’ 
war—an’ politics” (George Ade, County 
Chairman, 1903).
all’s for the best in the best of all pos-
sible worlds  Everything that happens 
does so for a good reason, and things in 
general cannot be any better; generally 
used to present an optimistic worldview: 
“The administrative departments were 
consuming miles of red tape in the cor-
rectest forms of activity, and everything 
was for the best in the best of all possible 
all is not gold that glitters
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   6 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
7
worlds” (George Bernard Shaw, The Shew-
ing-up of Blanco Posnet, 1911). The proverb 
is a translation of a line from the French 
writer Voltaire’s philosophical tale Candide 
(1759). In The Silver Stallion (1926), James 
Branch Cabell made the more cynical 
observation: “The optimist proclaims that 
we live in the best of all possible worlds; 
and the pessimist fears this is true.”
all’s well that ends well  Problems and 
misfortunes along the way can be for-
gotten when everything ends satisfac-
torily: “When the books were signed 
the vicar congratulated the husband and 
wife on having performed a noble, and 
righteous, and mutually forgiving act. 
‘All’s well that ends well,’ he said smiling” 
(Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure, 1895). 
First recorded in this form c. 1530, the 
proverb is perhaps best known as the title 
of one of Shakespeare’s plays.
all that glitters is not gold  People and 
things are not always as attractive or valu-
able as they seem: “‘I do wish I hadn’t a 
penny in the world, then I should know 
who my true friends were.’ ‘Poor little 
lass! She has found out that all that glitters 
is not gold, and the disillusion has begun,’ 
said the doctor to himself ” (Louisa May 
Alcott, Rose in Bloom, 1876). The proverb 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play The Merchant 
of Venice (2:7) in the form “All that glisters 
is not gold,” but the sentiment it expresses 
was fi rst recorded c. 1220.
Variant of this proverb: all is not gold 
that glitters.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
appearances are deceiving.
all the world’s a stage  Everybody goes 
through life acting out the roles that they 
have to play: “Jackie [Onassis] never lets 
down in public. The whole world is a stage 
and she’s its leading lady” (New York Post, 
1994). The proverb was popularized in 
this form in Shakespeare’s play As You Like It 
(2:7): “All the world’s a stage,/And all the 
men and women merely players:/They 
have their exits and their entrances;/And 
one man in his time plays many parts.”
Variant of this proverb: the world is a 
stage and all the people in it actors.
all things are easy to industry, all things 
diffi cult to sloth  Anything can be 
achieved by those who are prepared to 
work hard: You’ll never fi nd a job if you sit in 
front of the television all day—all things are 
easy to industry, all things diffi cult to sloth. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1734, in Ben-
jamin Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Variant of this proverb: sloth makes 
all things diffi cult, but industry makes all 
things easy.
all things are possible with God  Noth-
ing is impossible to the divine will; often 
used more generally to imply that any-
thing might happen: He seemed an unlikely 
candidate for the priesthood, but all things 
are possible with God. The proverb is of 
biblical origin in its current form: “With 
men this is impossible; but with God all 
things are possible” (Matthew 19:26), but 
the sentiment it expressed is found much 
earlier, in Homer’s Odyssey (c. eighth cen-
tury b.c.): “with the gods all things can 
be done.”
all things come to an end  See every-
thing has an end.
all things come to those who wait  If 
you are patient, you will have what you 
 all things come to those who wait
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   7 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
8
desire: Remember that all things come to those 
who wait, and don’t be too disappointed if you 
miss promotion this time. First recorded in 
1530 with different wording, the proverb 
occurs in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s 
Tales of a Wayside Inn (1863): “All things 
come to him who will but wait.”
Variants of this proverb: all good 
things come to those who wait; every-
thing comes to those who wait.
all things will pass  See this, too, shall 
pass.
all words are pegs to hang ideas on 
Words are simply tools for the formula-
tion and communication of ideas: It doesn’t 
matter which terminology you use—all words 
are pegs to hang ideas on. The proverb origi-
nated in 1887, in Henry Ward Beecher’s 
Proverbs from Plymouth Pulpit.
all work and no play makes Jack a dull 
boy  People who do not make time 
for leisure activities risk damaging their 
health, the quality of their work, or their 
personal relationships; often used to jus-
tify a break from work or to persuade 
somebody to take one: You’re doing far 
too much overtime—all work and no play 
makes Jack a dull boy. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1659. It may be applied 
to people of either sex, often with the 
person’s name in place of Jack (and girl in 
place of boy, if appropriate).
always a bridesmaid, never a bride  If 
you are often asked to be a bridesmaid—
traditionally, three or more times—you 
will never marry yourself; also used more 
generally as a lament by a young woman 
who receives many invitations to be brides-
maid but no proposals of marriage: I’ve been 
bridesmaid to three of my old schoolfriends—
when will it be my turn to get married? Always 
a bridesmaid, never a bride. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1882 in E. M. Ingraham’s 
Bond & Free in the form “Always a maiden, 
never a wife,” the word maiden meaning 
“bridal attendant” in this context.
Variant of this proverb: three times a 
bridesmaid, never a bride.
always in a hurry, always behind  When 
you try to do things too quickly you work 
less effi ciently and ultimately take longer: 
Bearing in mind the saying “Always in a hurry, 
always behind,” I made an effort to slow down 
and work more methodically. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1948 in a U.S. prov-
erb collection.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: more haste, less speed; haste 
makes waste.
always look on the bright side  You 
should always take the optimistic or posi-
tive view, especially when things are going 
badly: “I was walking the ridgepole and I 
fell off. I expect I have sprained my ankle. 
But . . . I might have broken my neck. Let 
us look on the bright side of things” (Lucy 
Maud Montgomery, Anne of Green Gables, 
1908). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1726, in a sermon by John Wesley. 
According to a less well-known saying, 
“If you try to make some people see the 
bright side, they will complain that it 
hurts their eyes.”
Variant of this proverb: look on the 
bright side, or polish up the dark one.
always something new out of Africa 
Africa is an endless source of novelty and 
interest: The story just goes to prove that 
there is always something new out of Africa. 
all things will pass
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   8 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
9
The proverb was recorded as early as the 
fourth century b.c. by Aristotle in De 
Anima. It became more familiar in more 
modern times through the release of the 
fi lm entitled Out of Africa in 1985.
always take the bitter with the better 
See you have to take the bitter with 
the sweet.
America is a tune: it must be sung 
together  There is a need for unity and 
harmony among and within the states of 
America: America is a tune, it must be sung 
together, and we must strive to achieve consen-
sus on this issue. The proverb is recorded 
as a regional expression in the United 
States.
anger improves nothing but the arch of a 
cat’s back  There is nothing to be gained 
by losing your temper: It’s no use shouting 
at them when they make a mistake—anger 
improves nothing but the arch of a cat’s back. 
The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
anger without power is folly  It is futile 
to get angry about things you can do noth-
ing about: He is in no position to do anything 
and might as well as calm down: as they say, 
anger without power is folly. The proverb is 
thought to have been ultimately of Ger-
man origin.
another day, another dollar  However 
hard or tedious paid work may be, at least 
there is some fi nancial reward; often said 
with relief at the end of the working day 
or, more generally, in the hope of a better 
day tomorrow: I get little job satisfaction 
from the work, but my philosophy is “Another 
day, another dollar.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1957, in D. Erskine’s Pink 
Hotel, but may have originated earlier in 
the 20th century.
Variant of this proverb: a new day, a 
new dollar.
any port in a storm  In desperate cir-
cumstances people will accept help from 
any source, including those they would 
normally shun: “‘I have understood that 
there is a little feeling between you and 
Mr. Hand and the other gentlemen I have 
mentioned. But . . . I’m in a corner, and 
it’s any port in a storm. If you want to 
help me I’ll make the best terms I can, 
and won’t forget the favor’” (Theodore 
Dreiser, The Titan, 1914). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1749, in John Cle-
land’s Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure, better 
known as Fanny Hill.
any publicity is good publicity  Even 
bad publicity draws attention to a person 
or product and may therefore serve a 
useful purpose: The show was panned in the 
popular press, but ticket sales have soared—it 
seems that any publicity is good publicity! The 
proverb probably originated in the 20th 
century.
any stick will serve to beat a dog 
with  See it’s easy to find a stick to 
beat a dog.
anything worth doing is worth doing 
well  See if a thing’s worth doing, 
it’s worth doing well.
an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, though 
they be clad in silk or scarlet  The true 
nature of a person or thing may be hid-
den by outside appearance but cannot be 
changed: “The naked ape is in danger of 
 an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, though they be clad in silk or scarlet
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   9 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
10
. . . forgetting that beneath the surface 
gloss he is still very much a primate. (‘An 
ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, though 
they be clad in silk or scarlet’)” (Desmond 
Morris, The Naked Ape, 1967). The prov-
erb is of ancient origin in the form “An 
ape is an ape, even if it has gold insignia,” 
which occurs in the works of the Greek 
writer Lucian (c. 125–c. 200). The word 
varlet may mean “servant” or “rogue,” and 
silk and scarlet are traditionally worn by 
holders of high offi ce, such as in the legal 
profession, at whom the proverb is often 
directed.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
clothes don’t make the man.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: clothes make the man.
appearances are deceiving  Things are 
not always as they seem, and you can-
not necessarily trust the evidence of 
your eyes: “Ahem—nothing of this, eh, 
Selden? As one of the family, I know I 
may count on you—appearances are 
deceptive—and Fifth Avenue is so imper-
fectly lighted” (Edith Wharton, The House 
of Mirth, 1905). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection, but the sentiment it expresses 
can be found in one of the fables of 
Aesop (sixth century b.c.), which also 
gave rise to the fi gurative phrase a wolf in 
sheep’s clothing.
Variant of this proverb: appearances 
are deceptive.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
all that glitters is not gold; a good 
horse cannot be of a bad color.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: if it looks like a duck, walks like 
a duck, and quacks like a duck, it’s a 
duck; what you see is what you get.
appetite comes with eating  Desire or 
enthusiasm for something often increases 
as you do it: They say that appetite comes 
with eating, and it seemed that the killer grew 
more hungry for blood after each successive 
murder. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in Rabelais’s Gargantua (1534), in the 
French form “l’appétit vient en mange-
ant.” In Hamlet (1:2), Shakespeare wrote 
(of Gertrude’s love for Hamlet’s father): 
“Why, she would hang on him,/As if 
increase of appetite had grown/By what 
it fed on.”
Variant of this proverb: the appetite 
grows on what it feeds on.
an apple a day keeps the doctor 
away  Fruit is an important part of a 
healthy diet: “An apple a day keeps the 
doctor away. But wait! Has the apple 
been treated with Alar?” (Washington Post, 
1991). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1866 in the form “Eat an apple on going 
to bed,/And you’ll keep the doctor from 
earning his bread.”
the apple never falls far from the 
tree  Children resemble their parents in 
character and nature: “Forbes has a lively 
sense of fun (his motorcycling, balloon-
riding father, Malcolm, certainly had one, 
and the apple does not fall far from the 
tree)” (Washington Post, 1996). The prov-
erb is also sometimes used with reference 
to children who choose to live close to 
their parents or their place of birth, as in 
a letter by Ralph Waldo Emerson (1839): 
“As men say the apple never falls far from 
the stem, I shall hope that another year 
will draw your eyes and steps to this old 
dear odious haunt of the race.” Compare 
the 16th-century German proverb “Der 
Apfel fellt nicht gerne weit vom Baume [The 
appearances are deceiving
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   10 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
11
apple does not usually fall far from the 
tree].”
Variant of this proverb: an apple 
doesn’t roll far from the tree.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: like father, like son; like mother, 
like daughter.
April showers bring May fl owers  Some-
thing unpleasant often leads to something 
more desirable: We have had a diffi cult few 
months setting up the project, but April showers 
bring May fl owers, and we’re optimistic about the 
future. First recorded c. 1560, with different 
wording, the proverb is often used with its 
literal meaning as one of the many sayings 
quoted by amateur weather forecasters.
Variant of this proverb: March 
winds and April showers always bring 
May fl owers.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every cloud has a silver lining.
ååååå
 April showers bring May fl owers
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   11 1/29/07   5:12:17 PM
12
an army marches on its stomach  You 
must eat well if you want to work effec-
tively or achieve great things: “‘We should 
go,’ one of the sergeants said, eating his 
cheese and drinking a cup of wine. . . . 
‘An army travels on its stomach,’ I said” 
(Ernest Hemingway, A Farewell to Arms, 
1929). The proverb has been attributed 
to Frederick the Great (1712–86) and 
Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821).
Variant of this proverb: an army trav-
els on its stomach.
art consists in concealing art  See the 
best art conceals art.
art is long and life is short  Works of 
art are far more enduring than human 
lives: He used the works of the great artists of 
the Italian Renaissance to illustrate the saying 
“Art is long and life is short.” The proverb 
originated in the writings of the Greek 
physician Hippocrates (fourth century 
b.c.), where it was used with the mean-
ing that life is too short to become fully 
versed in an art, specifi cally the profession 
of medicine. Chaucer translated this c. 
1380 as “The lyf so short, the craft so long 
to lerne.” The proverb is still sometimes 
used with its ancient interpretation, as in 
Charles Dickens’s novel Martin Chuzzlewit 
(1843–44): “This . . . is my chamber. I 
read here when the family suppose I have 
retired to rest. Sometimes I injure my 
health rather more than I can quite justify 
to myself, by doing so; but art is long and 
time is short.” The proverb is also quoted 
in the Latin form “Ars longa, vita brevis.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the day is short and the work is long.
art is power  The arts, and those who 
work with them, are powerful agents of 
infl uence: We should remember that art is 
power, and treat our young artists accordingly. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1839, 
in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s prose 
romance Hyperion.
the art of being a parent consists of 
sleeping when the baby isn’t looking  The 
parents of a young baby must take what-
ever opportunity they can to catch up 
on lost sleep; a facetious comment on 
parenthood, implying that babies delight 
in keeping their parents awake: Jack’s 
fi rst child was born three weeks ago, and he’s 
been coming to work with dark rings under 
his eyes—I had to remind him that the art 
of being a parent consists of sleeping while 
the baby isn’t looking! This proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
as a tree falls, so shall it lie  People 
should not attempt to change their beliefs 
or opinions just because they are about 
to die: “She sent a message . . . to the old 
father to come and see her before she 
died. . . . His answer was, ‘As a tree falls 
so shall it lie’” (W. H. Hudson, Traveller 
in Little Things, 1921). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “in the place where the 
tree falleth, there it shall be” (Ecclesiastes 
11:3). It was fi rst recorded in its current 
form in a proverb collection of 1678.
Variant of this proverb: where the 
tree falls, there it shall lie.
as good be an addled egg as an idle 
bird  Somebody who tries and fails has 
achieved no less than somebody who 
does nothing at all; used as a reprimand 
for idleness or inaction: You could at least 
go out and try to fi x the gate—as good be 
an addled egg as an idle bird. The proverb 
an army marches on its stomach
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   12 1/29/07   5:12:17 PM
13
was fi rst recorded in 1578: “If I had not 
bene gathered from the tree in the budde, 
I should beeing blowne haue proued a 
blast, and as good as it is to bee an addle 
egge as an idle bird” (John Lyly, Euphues).
as is the father, so is the son  See like 
father, like son.
as is the mother, so is the daughter  See 
like mother, like daughter.
ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, 
and ye shall fi nd; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you  If you want some-
thing, take positive action to get it: Ask, 
and it shall be given you—don’t just sit there 
hoping that something will turn up. The 
proverb is of biblical origin, from Mat-
thew 7:7.
Variant of this proverb: them as asks, 
gits; them as don’t ask, don’t git.
ask advice, but use your own common 
sense  It is wise to ask for the advice of 
others when you need it, but foolish to 
follow that advice if your common sense 
suggests otherwise: Everybody says I should 
resign, but I think this is a bit rash—my 
policy is “Ask advice, but use your own com-
mon sense.”
ask a silly question and you get a silly 
answer  If you ask a question that cannot 
be answered, or to which the answer is 
obvious, you are likely to receive a face-
tious or nonsensical reply: I asked her what 
time I should expect her and she said, “When I 
arrive.” Ask a silly question and you get a silly 
answer! The proverb is based on a biblical 
quotation, “Answer a fool according to 
his folly, lest he be wise in his own con-
ceit” (Proverbs 26:5). Its current form is 
relatively recent; in earlier versions other 
words (such as foolish or strange) were 
used in place of silly.
Variant of this proverb: silly ques-
tion, silly answer.
ask me no questions and I’ll tell you 
no lies  It is better not to ask questions 
that somebody is likely to be unwilling 
to answer truthfully; used in response to 
such a question or simply to discourage an 
inquisitive person: “—Did she fall or was 
she pushed? he asked her. She answered, 
slighting:—Ask no questions and you’ll 
hear no lies” (James Joyce, Ulysses, 1922). 
The proverb originated in 1773, in Oliver 
Goldsmith’s She Stoops to Conquer: “Ask me 
no questions and I’ll tell you no fi bs.”
Variant of this proverb: ask no ques-
tions and hear no lies.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
curiosity killed the cat.
as Maine goes, so goes the nation  The 
members of a large group will follow the 
lead of an infl uential part of the group: 
They are worried that this crisis in the com-
puter industry may be just the beginning—as 
Maine goes, so goes the nation. The proverb 
originated in the late 19th or early 20th 
centuries, referring to state elections in 
Maine that were thought to predict how 
the subsequent national elections would 
go. Other words or place-names are some-
times substituted for Maine and nation, as 
in Crain’s New York Business (1994): “As Wall 
Street goes, so goes the New York offi ce 
market.”
Variant of this proverb: so goes 
Maine, so goes the nation.
as many men, as many opinions  See so 
many men, so many opinions.
 as many men, as many opinions
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   13 1/29/07   5:12:17 PM
14
as the day lengthens, so the cold strength-
ens  The coldest part of the winter often 
occurs in the period following the short-
est day, as the hours of daylight begin to 
grow longer: We usually get our worst frosts in 
January and February, proving the old saying “As 
the day lengthens, so the cold strengthens.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1631: “The 
New Year now begun, as the Days began to 
lengthen, so the Cold began to strengthen” 
(E. Pellham, God’s Power).
as the twig is bent, so is the tree 
inclined  A child’s early education and 
training are of great importance in deter-
mining the way he or she will grow up: It 
is never too soon to teach your children right 
from wrong—as the twig is bent, so is the tree 
inclined. The proverb originated in 1732, 
in Alexander Pope’s Epistles to Several Per-
sons: “’Tis Education forms the common 
mind,/Just as the Twig is bent, the Tree’s 
inclined.”
Variant of this proverb: as the twig is 
bent, the child will grow.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: nature passes nurture.
as you bake, so shall you brew  The 
way you begin determines whether you 
will do badly or well: As you bake, so shall 
you brew, and if you had worked harder at 
college you would have got a better job at the 
end of it. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1577: “As thou bakst, so shat brewe” 
(Misogonus).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
as you sow, so shall you reap.
as you brew, so shall you drink  People 
have to face the consequences of their 
actions: He built up his business by exploit-
ing his workforce, and now they have turned 
against him—as you brew, so shall you drink. 
The proverb occurs in a collection of 
13th-century poetry in the form “Let him 
habbe [have] as he brew, bale [misery] to 
dryng [drink].” From the 16th century 
onward the variant form became more 
frequent.
Variant of this proverb: as you brew, 
so shall you bake.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
as you make your bed, so you must lie 
in it.
as you make your bed, so you must lie in 
it  You must put up with the unpleasant 
results of a foolish action or decision: We 
disapprove of the young man our daughter is 
living with, and I told her not to come running 
home to us if he treats her badly. “As you make 
your bed, so you must lie in it,” I said. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with differ-
ent wording, c. 1590. A similar proverb 
was recorded in French a century earlier: 
“Comme on faict son lict, on le treuve [As one 
makes one’s bed, so one fi nds it].”
Variant of this proverb: you’ve made 
your bed, now lie in it.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
as you brew, so shall you drink.
as you sow, so shall you reap  The way 
you behave—badly or well—determines 
what will happen to you in the future: Her 
article offended a lot of important people, and 
now she fi nds herself ostracized—as you sow, so 
shall you reap. The proverb is of biblical ori-
gin: “whatsoever a man soweth, that shall 
he also reap. For he that soweth to his fl esh 
shall of the fl esh reap corruption; but he 
that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit 
reap life everlasting” (Galatians 6:7–8).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
as you bake, so shall you brew.
as the day lengthens, so the cold strengthens
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   14 1/29/07   5:12:17 PM
15
at night all cats are gray  See all cats 
are gray in the dark.
attack is the best form of defense  See 
the best defense is a good offense.
avoidance is the only remedy  Some-
times the only solution to a problem is to 
avoid it in the fi rst place: As we have no cure 
for the disease, avoidance is the only remedy. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1380 by 
Geoffrey Chaucer in Minor Poems.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: there’s a remedy for everything 
except death.
away goes the devil when he fi nds the 
door shut against him  Evil will never 
triumph if all temptations are rejected: 
The old lady prevented her daughter receiving 
male visitors, fi rmly believing that the devil 
goes away when he fi nds the door shut against 
him. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1659 by James Howell in Paroemiographia.
 away goes the devil when he fi nds the door shut against him