16
the back door robs the house  See a 
postern door makes a thief.
a bad excuse is better than none  It 
is better to give a poor or implausible 
excuse—which may, in fact, be believed—
than to have no explanation or justifi cation 
at all: On the basis that a bad excuse is better 
than none, I told him that I had accidentally put 
my essay in the mailbox. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1551: “This is as thei saie in 
English, better a badde excuse, then none at 
all” (Thomas Wilson, The Rule of Reason).
Variant of this proverb: a poor excuse 
is better than none.
a bad husband makes a bad wife  See a 
good husband makes a good wife.
bad money drives out good  The exis-
tence or availability of something infe-
rior or worthless—whether it be money, 
music, literature, or whatever—has a 
tendency to make things of better qual-
ity or greater value more scarce: “bad 
politics tends to drive out good politics 
just as bad money drives out good money” 
(Aldous Huxley, letter dated November 
18, 1933). Known as Gresham’s Law, 
this principle was suggested by the Eng-
lish fi nancier Sir Thomas Gresham (c. 
1519–79), who observed that the circu-
lation of coins made of low-value metal 
caused people to hoard those made of 
precious metal and thus remove them 
from circulation. Although Gresham may 
not have originated the idea, the principle 
was formulated as a theory and named in 
his honor by the Scottish economist H. D. 
MacLeod in 1858. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in its current form in 1902 in 
The New English Dictionary.
bad news always comes too soon  See 
he comes too early who brings bad 
news.
bad news travels fast  Bad news, or 
unfavorable gossip, tends to be dissemi-
nated far more quickly than good news, 
the implication being that people delight 
in talking or hearing about the misfor-
tunes of others: I know bad news travels fast, 
but I had only just got home from work when 
my sister phoned to ask if it was true that I had 
been fi red. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1592 (“Euill newes fl ie faster still than 
good” [Thomas Kyd, Spanish Tragedy]) but 
is probably of ancient origin.
Variant of this proverb: ill news 
comes apace.
a bad penny always turns up  Undesir-
able people will always return; often used 
b
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   16 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
17
when somebody who has left in disgrace 
reappears after a long absence: I hear her 
ex-husband’s back in town—a bad penny 
always turns up. First recorded in 1766 
as a simile, in a letter written by Abigail 
Adams, it subsequently occurred in Sir 
Walter Scott’s Redgauntlet (1824) in the 
form “the bad shilling is sure enough to 
come back again.”
Variant of this proverb: a bad penny 
always comes back.
a bad workman quarrels with his 
tools  Workers who lack skill or com-
petence blame their tools or equipment 
when things go wrong: He apologized for 
the rough edges on some of the panels, say-
ing that his saw was blunt—a bad workman 
always quarrels with his tools. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English, with dif-
ferent wording, in 1611. However, the 
French had a similar proverb in the late 
13th century: “Mauvés ovriers ne trovera ja 
bon hostill [A bad workman will never fi nd 
a good tool].” The U.S. writer Ambrose 
Bierce parodied the proverb in his Devil’s 
Dictionary (1911): “A bad workman quar-
rels with the man who calls him that.”
Variant of this proverb: a bad work-
man blames his tools.
a barking dog never bites  People who 
make the most or the loudest threats 
are the least likely to take action: “‘De 
la poigne et des formes,’ cried the stout 
general, ‘de la poigne surtout.’ And to 
translate into Russian; be civil, but don’t 
spare your fi sts.” “‘Ah, you’re a ras-
cal, an incorrigible rascal,’ interposed 
the condescending general. ‘Mesdames, 
don’t listen to him, please. A barking dog 
does not bite’” (Ivan Turgenev, Smoke, 
1867). First recorded in French in the 
13th century, the proverb features in a 
popular 20th-century joke about a man 
who is reluctant to enter premises where 
a dog is barking loudly. On being assured 
that “A barking never bites,” he replies, “I 
know that and you know that, but does 
the dog know that?”
Variants of this proverb: dogs that 
bark don’t always bite; barking dogs sel-
dom bite.
a bawling cow soon forgets her own 
calf  See a bellowing cow soon for-
gets her calf.
a bayonet is a weapon with a worker 
at each end  The weapons of war are 
used by ordinary people against ordinary 
people: Although I knew I was fi ghting the 
enemies of my country, my conscience kept 
reminding me of the saying that a bayonet 
is a weapon with a worker at each end. The 
proverb originated in 1940 as a British 
pacifi st slogan.
bear and forbear  Patience, tolerance, 
endurance, and forgiveness are valuable 
qualities in all walks of life: “‘Davie, ye’ll 
have to try and forgive me.’ ‘O man, let’s 
say no more about it! . . . We’re neither 
one of us to mend the other—that’s the 
truth! We must just bear and forbear’” 
(Robert Louis Stevenson, Kidnapped, 
1886). First recorded in this form in 
1573, the proverb is probably of ancient 
origin: the Greek philosopher Epictetus 
(fi rst century a.d.) wrote “be patient and 
endure.” In its early use the proverb was 
often put forward as a formula for harmo-
nious married life.
Variant of this proverb: you must 
take two bears to live with you—bear 
and forbear.
 bear and forbear
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   17 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
18
beauty and honesty seldom agree  It is 
rare for a person to be both good-looking 
and honest: “Beawtie and honesty seldome 
agree, for of beautie comes temptation, of 
temptation dishonour (John Florio, Sec-
ond Frutes, 1591). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1580 by John Lyly in Euphues 
and his England.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
beauty is only skin deep.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: beauty is truth, truth beauty.
beauty draws with a single hair  A beau-
tiful woman has great powers of attraction: 
“Fair tresses man’s imperial race insnare,/
And beauty draws us with a single hair” 
(Alexander Pope, The Rape of the Lock, 
1714). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1591, in John Florio’s Second Fruits: “Ten 
teems of oxen draw much less,/Than 
doth one haire of Helens tresse.”
Variant of this proverb: beauty draws 
more than oxen.
beauty is a good letter of introduc-
tion  Beautiful people make a better 
fi rst impression on strangers than ugly 
people do: She doesn’t know anybody in 
the town, but if it’s true that beauty is a 
good letter of introduction, then she’ll have 
no diffi culty making friends. This proverb 
is recorded as a regional expression in 
the USA.
beauty is but a blossom  Good looks do 
not last: “As there is no true cuckold but 
calamity, so beauty’s a fl ower” (William 
Shakespeare, Twelfth Night, 1:5). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1616 by T. Draxe 
in Bibliotheca Scholastica.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: a thing of beauty is a joy forever.
beauty is in the eye of the beholder  The 
perception of beauty is subjective, and 
not everybody fi nds the same people or 
things attractive: “‘Answer, O my Gul-
Bahar, more beautiful growing as the 
days multiply!’ ‘Thou fl atterer! Do I not 
know beauty is altogether in the eye of 
the beholder, and that all persons do not 
see alike?’” (Lewis Wallace, Prince of India, 
1893). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in the late 18th century, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of much earlier 
origin. Compare Theocritus (c. 308–c. 
240 b.c.), “in the eyes of love that which is 
not beautiful often seems beautiful.”
beauty is no inheritance  Good looks 
are not necessarily passed on from gen-
eration to generation: It took only one look 
at mother and daughter to confi rm the truth 
behind the saying “beauty is no inheritance.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1633 
by T. Draxe in Bibliotheca Scholastica, in the 
variant form “beauty is no heritage.”
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: like father, like son; like mother, 
like daughter.
beauty is only skin deep  Beauty is only 
a superfi cial quality, and may conceal an 
unpleasant character or nature: He was one 
of the many men who forget that beauty is only 
skin deep and fi nd themselves fi ling for divorce 
after a couple of years of marriage. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1613. In 1960 
Jean Kerr wrote, in The Snake Has All the 
Lines, “I’m tired of all this nonsense about 
beauty being only skin deep. That’s deep 
enough. What do you want—an adorable 
pancreas?”
Variant of this proverb: beauty is 
only skin deep, but goodness goes to the 
bone.
beauty and honesty seldom agree
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   18 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
19
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
beauty and honesty seldom agree.
beauty is truth, truth beauty  The 
qualities of beauty and truth are, or 
should be, inseparable and interlinked; 
often used when real life falls short of 
this ideal: “Beauty is truth, truth beauty,” 
but there is nothing beautiful about the 
truths that have been exposed in this sordid 
affair. The proverb originated in 1819, in 
John Keats’s poem Ode on a Grecian Urn: 
“‘Beauty is truth, truth beauty,’—that is 
all/Ye know on earth, and all ye need 
to know.”
be careful what you wish for: you might 
get it  See don’t wish too hard; you 
might just get what you wished for.
because a man is born in a stable that 
does not make him a horse  See the man 
who is born in a stable is not a horse.
beggars can’t be choosers  We must 
accept with gratitude and without com-
plaint what we are given when we do not 
have the means or opportunity to provide 
ourselves with something better: “. . . it’s 
a shame we got to entertain you in such a 
cramped place. And there ain’t any water 
except that ole iron sink outside in the hall, 
but . . . beggars can’t be choosers” (Sinclair 
Lewis, Main Street, 1920). First recorded in 
1546, the proverb formerly had must not or 
should not in place of can’t.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: never look a gift horse in the 
mouth; when all fruit fails, welcome 
haws.
be happy while you’re living, for you’re 
a long time dead  Make the most of life 
during the relatively short period that it 
lasts: My philosophy is “Be happy while you’re 
living, for you’re a long time dead,” and I try 
not to let things get me down. The origin of 
this proverb is the Scottish motto for a 
house: “Be happy while y’er leevin,/For 
y’er a lang time deid.”
behind every great man is a great woman 
Important or successful men often owe 
their status or success to the support of a 
female partner or colleague: They say that 
behind every great man there is a great woman, 
but the new head of the corporation—a con-
fi rmed bachelor—seems to be an exception to 
that rule.
be just before you’re generous  You 
should make sure all your debts are paid 
and other obligations met before you 
start giving money away or living extrava-
gantly: “I owe every farthing of my money. 
. . . There’s an old proverb—be just 
before you’re generous” (Captain Marryat, 
Peter Simple, 1834). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1745, but with the implication 
that it was already in general use.
be kind to your friends; if it weren’t for 
them, you would be a total stranger  You 
cannot afford to lose your friends by treat-
ing them badly, because without them you 
would be alone in society: I think you 
should invite her to stay with you for a few 
days—be kind to your friends; if it weren’t for 
them, you would be a total stranger.
believe only half of what you see and 
nothing you hear  Do not be too ready 
to believe all the evidence of your eyes 
and ears; used as a warning to beware of 
false appearances and rumors: “Diplomats 
arriving in Haiti are told to believe ‘noth-
 believe only half of what you see and nothing you hear
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   19 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
20
ing you hear and only half of what you 
see’” (New York Times, 1994). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1845, but the senti-
ment it expresses dates from c. 1300 or 
earlier. The verb read is sometimes substi-
tuted for see or hear.
Variant of this proverb: believe noth-
ing of what you hear, and only half of what 
you see.
a believer is a songless bird in a 
cage  Religious belief restricts a per-
son’s freedom of action and expression: 
When asked why she never went to church, my 
aunt would always reply with the saying “A 
believer is a songless bird in a cage.”  The prov-
erb originated in a speech made in 1873 
by the U.S. lawyer, orator, and agnostic 
Robert Green Ingersoll.
believing has a core of unbelieving  Be-
lief and unbelief are closely related, and 
sometimes you need to start from a posi-
tion of skepticism to arrive at the truth: 
Believing has a core of unbelieving, and they 
eventually accepted what had fi rst appeared to 
be an incredible explanation of the phenom-
enon. The proverb originated in Robert 
Buchanan’s Songs of Seeking (c. 1866).
a bellowing cow soon forgets her 
calf  The loudest laments or complaints 
are often the fi rst to subside; used spe-
cifi cally of those whose mourning seems 
excessive: “When a woman, newly wid-
owed, had tried to throw herself into her 
husband’s grave . . . someone . . . said 
. . . ‘Ah, you wait. The bellowing cow’s 
always the fi rst to forget its calf’” (Flora 
Thompson, Lark Rise to Candleford, 1945). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1895, 
but with the implication that it had long 
been in regional use.
Variant of this proverb: a bawling 
cow soon forgets her own calf.
be longing   See an idle youth, a needy 
age.
be nice to people on your way up 
because you’ll meet them on your way 
down  Try to avoid making enemies as 
you rise in your chosen career, because 
you may need the help of the same people 
if you fi nd yourself descending through 
the ranks again: “The man whose posture 
is servile in the presence of his superiors 
and rude or off-hand with his subordi-
nates has forgotten the old chestnut ‘Be 
nice to the little man on your way up, 
you might meet him on your way down’” 
(Milla Alihan, Corporate Etiquette, 1974). 
Of U.S. origin, the proverb is believed 
to have been coined by either Wilson 
Mizner (1876–1933) or Jimmy Durante 
(1893–1980).
be not idle and you shall not be 
longing   See an idle youth, a needy 
age.
the best art conceals art  Artistic excel-
lence lies in making something that is 
subtle or intricate in construction appear 
simple and streamlined: “In oratory the 
greatest art is to hide art” (Jonathan Swift, 
Faculty of Mind, 1707). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English c. 1583, with dif-
ferent wording, but is obviously of earlier 
origin. It also exists in the Latin form “Ars 
est celare artem.”
Variant of this proverb: art consists 
in concealing art.
the best defense is a good offense  You 
are more likely to win if you take the 
a believer is a songless bird in a cage
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   20 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
21
initiative and make an attack rather than 
preparing to defend yourself; used in 
sport, politics, business, and the like: “The 
reigning corporate strategy these days is 
that the best defense is a good offense” 
(Washington Post, 1997). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in the late 18th century, and 
the sentiment it expresses is found in the 
writings of George Washington (1799): 
“Make them believe, that offensive opera-
tions, often times, is the surest . . . means 
of defense.”
Variant of this proverb: attack is the 
best form of defense.
the best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, 
and Dr. Merryman  The best recipe for 
good health consists of eating and drink-
ing sensibly and having plenty of rest and 
recreation: Many modern ills are caused by 
the junk food we eat and the hectic pace of our 
working lives. We should follow the advice of our 
great-grandparents, who believed that the best 
doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, and Dr. Mer-
ryman. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1558. “I should not staye my selfe vpon the 
opinion of any one phisicion, but rather 
vpon three. . . . The fi rst was called doctor 
diet, the seconde doctor quiet, the thirde 
doctor mery man” (W. Bullein, Government 
of Health).
Variant of this proverb: the three 
doctors Diet, Quiet, and Temperance are 
the best physicians.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
diet cures more than doctors.
the best is the enemy of the good  By 
constantly striving for the best we risk 
destroying, or failing to produce, some-
thing good: “To maintain that all that a 
school provides must be provided free 
makes the best the enemy of the good” 
(London Times, 1981). First recorded in 
English in 1861, the proverb may be of 
French, Italian, or Spanish origin.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: the good is the enemy of the best; 
if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth 
doing well.
the best is yet to be  No matter how 
good or bad the present may seem, some-
thing better lies ahead in the future: Long-
term economic forecasts suggest that the best is 
yet to be. The proverb originated in 1864, 
in Robert Browning’s poem Rabbi Ben 
Ezra: “Grow old along with me!/The best 
is yet to be,/The last of life, for which 
the fi rst was made:/Our times are in His 
hand.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the worst is yet to come.
the best-laid schemes of mice and men 
gang aft a-gley  There is always the 
possibility that things will go wrong, 
no matter how carefully you make your 
plans: I thought I had everything organized 
for the party, but the best-laid schemes of 
mice and men gang aft a-gley—the cater-
ers delivered the food to the wrong address! 
The proverb comes from Robert Burns’s 
poem To a Mouse (1786). The Scottish 
phrase gang aft a-gley means “often go 
awry.” In general use, the proverb is 
often shortened, and plans may be sub-
stituted for schemes.
Variant of this proverb: the best-laid 
schemes of mice and men oft go astray.
the best of friends must part  Friends 
cannot always be together, and not all 
friendships last a lifetime: “‘Aren’t there 
going to be any more lessons?’ . . . ‘The 
best of friends must part’” (William 
 the best of friends must part
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   21 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
22
Golding, Darkness Visible, 1979). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1611, but a simi-
lar sentiment was expressed by Chaucer 
in Troilus and Criseyde (c. 1385). It features 
in the traditional song “There is a Tavern 
in the Town”: “Fare thee well, for I must 
leave thee,/Do not let this parting grieve 
thee,/And remember that the best of 
friends must part.”
Variant of this proverb: even the best 
of friends must part.
the best of men are but men at 
best  Even the greatest people have their 
failings and limitations: Although it is said 
that the best of men are but men at best, the 
nation has a right to expect greater integrity 
from its head of state. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in John Aubrey’s Brief Lives 
(1877), as a saying of General John Lam-
bert (1619–84).
Variant of this proverb: the best of 
men are but men after all.
the best place for criticism is in front of 
your mirror  Before you criticize others, 
you should fi rst take a close look at your-
self: If she starts harping on again about the 
faults of her sister, I shall be tempted to remind 
her that the best place for criticism is in front 
of your own mirror.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the pot calls the kettle black.
the best things come in small packages 
Size has no bearing on quality, and a small 
container may hold something of great 
value; often said by or to a short person: 
When teased about her height, she would 
always reply, “The best things come in small 
packages.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1877 in a letter by B. Farjeon, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
general use. Other words and phrases may 
be substituted for the best things, including 
diamonds and dynamite.
Variant of this proverb: good things 
come in small packages.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
small is beautiful.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the larger the body, the bigger 
the heart.
the best things in life are free  The 
most rewarding or satisfying experiences 
in life are often those that cost nothing; 
also used of the wonders of nature or 
of abstract qualities such as health and 
friendship: The best things in life are free, and 
what could be better than a brisk walk across 
the hill on a sunny winter’s morning? The 
proverb originated in 1927 as the title 
of a song, which contains the following 
lines: “The moon belongs to everyone,/
The best things in life are free,/The stars 
belong to everyone,/They gleam there 
for you and me.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money isn’t everything.
the best way to get even is to forget  It 
can be more effective to suggest an insult 
or injury has had no lasting impact than 
it would be to retaliate: “She thought 
about writing him a dismissive letter 
about disloyalty, but then remembered 
that the best way to get even is to forget.” 
Though a relatively recent introduction in 
this form, similar sentiments have been 
expressed for centuries.
Variant of this proverb: to forget a 
wrong is the best revenge.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: neglect will kill an injury 
sooner than revenge.
the best of men are but men at best
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   22 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
23
be the day weary or be the day long, at 
last it ringeth to evensong  No matter 
how tiring or stressful a day you are having, 
you can console yourself with the fact that 
it will eventually be over; also used more 
generally to recommend perseverance or 
endurance in a trying situation: Whenever 
she felt things were getting me down, my mother 
would remind me that “be the day weary or be 
the day long, at last it ringeth to evensong.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1509. “For 
thoughe the day, be neuer so longe, At last 
the belles ryngeth to euensonge” (Stephen 
Hawes, Pastime of Pleasure).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: it’s a long road that has no 
turning; the longest day must have 
an end.
better a big fi sh in a little pond than a lit-
tle fi sh in a big pond  It is better to have 
a position of importance in a small organi-
zation than to be an unimportant member 
of a large group: She turned down the offer of 
a job with one of the largest multinationals in 
the industry, on the basis that it is better to be a 
big fi sh in a little pond than a little fi sh in a big 
pond. The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
Variant of this proverb: better a big 
fi sh in a little puddle than a little fi sh in a 
big puddle.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
better be the head of a dog than the 
tail of a lion.
better a dinner of herbs where love is 
than a stalled ox where hate is  It is 
better to be poor or dine badly in a loving 
environment than to eat well or have a 
wealthy lifestyle in an atmosphere of dis-
cord or hatred: “Lunch was a silent affair. 
. . . I said, ‘Better a dinner of herbs than a 
stalled ox where hate is’” (J. Drummond, 
I Saw Him Die, 1979). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Better is a dinner of herbs 
where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred 
therewith” (Proverbs 15:17).
better a good cow than a cow of a good 
kind  A person’s character is of more 
importance than his or her family back-
ground: He was afraid his parents might be 
disappointed in his fi ancée, an ordinary girl 
who had worked to support her unemployed 
parents since her mid-teens, but his mother 
later voiced her approval—in private—with 
the remark, “Better a good cow than a cow of a 
good kind.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1922, but with the implication that it 
was already in general use.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
kind hearts are more than coronets.
better a little fi re to warm us than a big 
one to burn us  Sometimes it is more 
desirable to have only a small amount of 
something: We must not be too dissatisfi ed 
with the size of our inheritance—better a little 
fi re to warm us than a big one to burn us. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1510. “Then 
better is small fi re one easyly to warme 
Then is a great fi re to do one hurt or 
harme” (Alexander Barclay, Eclogues).
better be an old man’s darling than a 
young man’s slave  It is better to marry 
an older man who will cherish you than to 
choose a younger husband who may treat 
you badly: “Let defeated rivals snarling,/
 Talk of one foot in the grave,/Better be an 
old man’s darling,/Than become a young 
man’s slave” (James Robinson Planché, 
Love and Fortune, 1859). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546, but with the impli-
cation that it was of much earlier origin. 
 better be an old man’s darling than a young man’s slave
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   23 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
24
At this time it had the rhyming words der-
lyng in place of darling and werlyng (mean-
ing “object of scorn”) in place of slave.
Variant of this proverb: better be 
a poor man’s darling than a rich man’s 
slave.
better be dead than out of fashion  See 
better be out of the world than out 
of the fashion.
better be envied than pitied  It is pref-
erable to have possessions or attributes 
that arouse envy in others than to be 
pitied for having little or nothing: I was 
aware that my good fortune might provoke 
resentment among my friends, but “Better be 
envied than pitied,” I always say. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English in 1546, but 
the sentiment it expresses is probably 
of ancient Greek origin. Compare Pin-
dar (c. 522–443 b.c.), “envy is stronger 
than pity,” and Herodotus (c. 480–c. 425 
b.c.), “it is better to be envied than to be 
pitied.”
better be fi rst in a village than second 
at Rome  It is better to be in charge in 
a small community or company than it is 
to be in a secondary position in a larger 
concern: “I should be like Caesar . . . and 
choose rather to be the fi rst man of the 
village, than second at Rome” (Abraham 
Cowley, Essays, 1668). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1542 by Nich-
olas Udall in Apothegms of Erasmus, but was 
originally a Roman saying, supposedly 
quoted by Julius Caesar in relation to his 
post as ruler of Gaul.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: the highest branch is not the saf-
est roost; uneasy lies the head that 
wears the crown.
better be out of the world than out of 
the fashion  Some people are so intent 
on following fashion that it seems they 
would rather die than do otherwise; also 
used with the implication that something 
that is not fashionable might as well not 
exist: “Women seem seldom hindered by 
lack of money when it is a case of follow-
my-leader. ‘Better be out of the world 
than out of the fashion’” (E. F. Maitland, 
From Window in Chelsea, 1903). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1639.
Variant of this proverb: better be 
dead than out of fashion.
better be the head of a dog than the tail 
of a lion  It is preferable to lead a rela-
tively minor group of people than to have 
an inferior position in a more important 
body: “The ancient . . . spirit of English-
men was once expressed by our proverb, 
‘Better be the head of a dog than the tail of 
a lion’; i.e. the fi rst of the yeomanry rather 
than the last of the gentry” (Isaac D’Israeli, 
Curiosities of Literature, 1791–1834). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1599. The 
earliest versions of the proverb had fox, 
mouse, or lizard in place of dog.
Variant of this proverb: better be the 
head of an ass than the tail of a horse.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
better a big fish in a little pond than 
a little fish in a big pond.
better death than dishonor  People 
should be prepared to give up their lives 
to avoid dishonor; used specifi cally in 
warfare and also more generally, as when 
the collapse of a business seems more 
desirable than a loss of integrity: “‘What 
was the old soldier’s code?’ Cortez asked 
himself. ‘Death before dishonor’” (Tom 
Clancy, Clear and Present Danger, 1989). 
better be dead than out of fashion
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   24 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
25
The fi rst recorded reference to the prov-
erb is in P. Wylie’s Murderer Invisible (1931), 
but it is probably of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: death before 
dishonor.
better late than never  It is better that 
somebody arrives or something happens 
later than expected or desired, than not 
at all: “I’m sick of these disgusting women 
I’ve spent my life with . . . and I’m rather 
anxious to settle down. A bit late in the 
day, perhaps, but better late than never” 
(George Orwell, A Clergyman’s Daughter, 
1935). First recorded in English c. 1330, 
the proverb is probably of ancient Roman 
origin. The phrase “but better never late” 
is often added or said in response to the 
proverb.
better luck next time  Hopefully things 
will go better for you next time: “Better 
luck next time,” said the dealer as he scooped up 
the chips. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1834 by Captain Frederick Marryat in 
Jacob Faithful. 
better one house spoiled than two  It 
is a good thing for two bad, foolish, or 
otherwise undesirable people to become 
husband and wife and thus avoid caus-
ing trouble in two separate marriages: I 
was pleased to hear that our neighbor’s awful 
son is marrying that dreadful girl from the 
fl orist’s—better one house spoiled than two! 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, with dif-
ferent wording, in 1586.
better safe than sorry  It is wiser to 
take precautions—even if they seem 
unnecessary or excessive—than to risk 
disaster: I went around the building one last 
time to check that all the doors and windows 
were locked—better safe than sorry. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1837, in Samuel 
Lover’s novel Rory O’More, with sure in 
place of safe.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s better to be on the safe side.
better something than nothing  See 
something is better than nothing.
the better the day, the better the 
deed  An action is of greater value 
because it is performed on a holy day; 
often used to justify working on Sunday, 
Good Friday, or Christmas Day: “The bet-
ter the day, the better the deed . . . It was 
only the Pharisees who objected to any 
necessary work being done on the Sab-
bath” (J. C. Hutcheson, Crown and Anchor, 
1896). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English in 1607. A similar proverb was 
recorded in French three centuries ear-
lier: “A bon jour bone euvre [For a good day, 
a good deed].”
better the devil you know than the devil 
you don’t know  It is often preferable 
to choose or stay with people or things 
you know, despite their faults, than to 
risk replacing them with somebody or 
something new but possibly less desir-
able: She was surprised that I was using the 
same builders again, after the problems I’d 
had with them last time, but better the devil 
you know than the devil you don’t know. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1857, in Anthony Trollope’s novel 
Barchester Towers: “‘Better the d— you 
know than the d— you don’t know,’ is 
an old saying . . . but the bishop had not 
yet realised the truth of it.” Compare 
the ancient Latin proverb “nota res mala, 
optima [an evil thing known is best].”
 better the devil you know than the devil you don’t know
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   25 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
26
better three hours too soon than a 
minute too late  See it’s better to be 
an hour too early than a minute too 
late.
better to wear out than to rust out  It is 
better to be exhausted by hard work than 
to remain idle; used by people accused of 
working too hard, especially old people 
who choose to remain active: Our gardener 
is in his eighties but has no plans to retire just 
yet—“Better to wear out than to rust out,” 
he says. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in this form in 1820, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of much earlier origin. In 
Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, Part 2 (1:2), 
Sir John Falstaff presents the opposite 
viewpoint: “I were better to be eaten to 
death with a rust than to be scoured to 
nothing with perpetual motion.”
between two stools one falls to the 
ground  Failure to choose between alter-
native courses of action, or to align your-
self with one of two opposing groups, 
may lead to disastrous consequences: You 
must make up your mind which job to accept, 
or they will both go to other people—between 
two stools one falls to the ground. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1390, with different 
wording, a version c. 1530 being closer to 
the modern form: “Between two stools, 
the arse goes to ground.” A similar senti-
ment is expressed in the medieval Latin 
proverb “labitur enitens sellis herere duabus 
[he falls trying to sit on two seats].” In 
modern times the proverb is more fre-
quently used in the form of the fi gurative 
phrase to fall between two stools.
Variant of this proverb: between two 
stools we come to the ground.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: when in doubt, do nothing.
beware of an oak, it draws the stroke; 
avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; creep 
under the thorn, it can save you from 
harm  It is dangerous to shelter from 
lightning under the oak, ash, or other 
trees: At the fi rst sound of thunder I made for 
the shelter of the hut, remembering my mother’s 
warning: “Beware of an oak, it draws the stroke; 
avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash.” This is a 
piece of ancient folklore that was fi rst 
recorded in 1878.
beware of Greeks bearing gifts  It is 
wise to be suspicious of offers or friendly 
gestures made by enemies or opponents: 
Remembering the saying “Beware of Greeks 
bearing gifts,” I decided to reject the invita-
tion of my professional rival, even at the risk 
of offending him. The proverb comes from 
Virgil’s Aeneid (fi rst century b.c.), “timeo 
Danaos, et dona ferentes [I fear the Greeks, 
even when bringing gifts],” a warning 
given to the Trojans when a large wooden 
horse (fi lled with Greek soldiers) was 
delivered to the gates of their city. An 
early reference to the proverb in English 
occurs in Anthony Trollope’s novel Phineas 
Redux (1873): “He would remind the 
right honourable gentleman that presents 
from Greeks had ever been considered 
dangerous.”
Variant of this proverb: fear the 
Greeks bearing gifts.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: never look a gift horse in the 
mouth.
be what you would seem to be  Your 
appearance should refl ect your true 
nature, and vice versa: “It’s a vegetable. 
It doesn’t look like one, but it is. . . . 
The moral of that is—‘Be what you 
would seem to be’” (Lewis Carroll, Alice’s 
better three hours too soon than a minute too late
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   26 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
27
Adventures in Wonderland, 1865). An early 
example is “Suche as thow semest in 
syghte, be in assay [trial] y-founde” (Wil-
liam Langland, Piers Plowman, c. 1377), 
although the sentiment is found in classi-
cal sources such as Aeschylus.
Variant of this proverb: be what you 
appear to be.
big fi sh eat little fi sh  Small organiza-
tions or insignifi cant people tend to be 
swallowed up or destroyed by those that 
are greater and more powerful: Only a 
handful of independent companies have sur-
vived in this competitive industry, where the 
big fi sh eat the little fi sh. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in a text dating from before 
1200. In Shakespeare’s play Pericles (2:1), 
the following exchange occurs between 
two fi shermen: “‘Master, I marvel how 
the fi shes live in the sea.’ ‘Why, as men do 
a-land—the great ones eat up the little 
ones.’”
big fl eas have little fl eas upon their 
backs to bite ’em, and little fl eas have 
lesser fl eas, and so ad infi nitum  In a 
hierarchy of size or importance, every 
member is affected by or dependent on 
the one above or below, and the hierarchy 
28
stretches to infi nity in both directions: 
Even a company of this size risks fi nancial 
disaster if one of its suppliers has prob-
lems—big fl eas have little fl eas, and so on. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1733, 
with different wording, in the satirical 
advice to a poet On Poetry, A Rhapsody by 
Jonathan Swift. Its current form comes 
from a 19th-century rhyme that contin-
ues: “And the great fl eas themselves, in 
turn, have greater fl eas to go on;/While 
these again have greater still, and greater 
still, and so on.”
the bigger they are, the harder they 
fall  The downfall of a great or impor-
tant person is more painful and cata-
strophic than that of a lesser person: “‘You 
are just a youth,’ he observed at last, ‘and he 
has been a great man of war from his boy-
hood. . . .’ ‘The bigger they are,’ I replied, 
‘the harder they fall’” (Joseph Heller, God 
Knows, 1984). The proverb in its current 
form is attributed to the heavyweight boxer 
Robert Fitzsimmons (1858–1917), but the 
sentiment it expresses was fi rst recorded 
in English as early as 1493. Compare the 
Roman poet Claudian (fourth century 
a.d.), “Tolluntur in altum/Ut lapsu graviore 
ruant [men are raised on high in order that 
they may fall more heavily].”
Variant of this proverb: the bigger 
they come, the harder they fall.
big is beautiful  There are advantages to 
large size: The success of this huge conglomer-
ate only goes to prove that big is beautiful. A 
U.S. proverb that became current from 
the 1960s, it is commonly applied in 
discussions of economies of scale in com-
mercial contexts.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: small is beautiful.
a bird in the hand is worth two in the 
bush  Something you have for certain 
now is of more value than something 
better you may get, especially if you 
risk losing what you have in order to get 
it: “More money might be obtained by 
selling the packages, but there was risk 
in this. Besides, it would take time, and 
they decided that a bird in the hand was 
worth two in the bush” (Horatio Alger, 
Paul the Peddler, 1871). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English c. 1450, with 
different wording, but the sentiment it 
expresses can be found in the fables of 
Aesop in the sixth century b.c. The cur-
rent form dates from no later than 1581. 
The U.S. actress Mae West parodied the 
proverb when she said, “A man in the 
house is worth two in the street,” in the 
movie Belle of the Nineties (1934).
Variant of this proverb: a bird in the 
hand is worth a hundred fl ying.
a bird never fl ew on one wing  Some-
thing extra or additional is required; often 
used to hint that another drink or some 
more money would be welcome: Let’s have 
another drop of whiskey before we go—a bird 
never fl ew on one wing. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1721, with different wording, 
in a collection of Scottish proverbs. It is 
found in the writings of 20th-century Irish 
writers, notably Sean O’Casey.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t fl y 
with one wing.
birds in their little nests agree  People 
who live or work together should try to do 
so in harmony; often used to stop children 
from arguing: “‘I detest rude, unlady-
like girls!’ ‘I hate affected, niminy-piminy 
chits!’ ‘Birds in their little nests agree,’ 
sang Beth, the peacemaker, with such a 
the bigger they are, the harder they fall
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   28 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
29
funny face that both sharp voices softened 
to a laugh, and the ‘pecking’ ended for 
that time” (Louisa May Alcott, Little Women, 
1868). The proverb originated in Isaac 
Watts’s Divine Songs for Children (1715): 
“Birds in their little Nests agree;/And ’tis 
a shameful Sight,/When Children of one 
Family/Fall out, and chide, and fi ght.”
birds of a feather fl ock together  People 
tend to associate with those of similar 
character, interests, or opinions; often 
used with derogatory implications: “Who 
are the guys that mostly get asked to the 
clubs? Preppies from St. Paul’s, Mark’s, 
Groton. It’s kind of a common bond. You 
know, birds of a feather fl ocking together 
and so forth” (Erich Segal, The Class, 1985). 
The proverb dates from the 16th century 
or earlier in this form, but the sentiment it 
expresses is found in the Apocrypha “The 
birds will resort unto their like” (Ecclesi-
asticus 27:9). It also occurs in a translation 
of Plato’s dialogues by Benjamin Jowett, 
published in 1871: “The old proverb says 
that ‘birds of a feather fl ock together’; 
I suppose that equality of years inclines 
them to the same pleasures, and similarity 
begets friendship; yet you may have more 
than enough even of this.” Some writers 
have substituted other verbs for fl ock, as in 
“birds of a feather laugh together” (James 
Joyce, Ulysses, 1922) and “birds of a feather 
fi ght together [that is, on the same side]” 
(Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, 1863–69).
Variant of this proverb: birds of a 
feather fl y together.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: like attracts like; a man is known 
by the company he keeps.
the bird that can sing and won’t sing 
should be made to sing  See little 
birds that can sing and won’t sing 
must be made to sing.
birth is much but breeding more  A 
person’s upbringing counts for more in 
the long run than the traits of character he 
or she was born with: If it is true that birth 
is much but breeding more then even such an 
unpromising beginning as this should not have 
any lasting effect upon the child’s prospects. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 by 
John Clarke in Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: nature passes nurture.
the biter is sometimes bit  Those who 
criticize or otherwise set about others 
are not immune from criticism or other 
attack themselves: “The biter was bit: 
the fox . . . was caught” (Charles Reade, 
Hard Cash, 1863). Quoted by Lucian, 
it was fi rst recorded in English in 1693 
by Thomas D’Urfey in The Richmond 
Duchess.
a bleating sheep loses a bite  Those who 
talk too much may miss an important 
opportunity: “He said something about a 
bleating sheep losing a bite; but I should 
think this young man is not much of a 
talker” (Ted Hughes, Tom Brown at Oxford, 
1861). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1599, with wording closer to that of the 
variant form.
Variant of this proverb: the sheep 
that bleats loses a mouthful.
blessed are the dead that the rain rains 
on  According to popular superstition, 
rainfall during a funeral is a blessing 
on the corpse: The old saying “Blessed are 
the dead that the rain rains on” was of little 
consolation to the mourners caught out by the 
 blessed are the dead that the rain rains on
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   29 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
30
downpour as they crossed the graveyard. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1607.
blessed are they who expect nothing, 
for they shall not be disappointed  It is 
better to have no expectations of happi-
ness or good fortune if you want to avoid 
suffering the pangs of disappointment: 
“‘Oh, Marilla, looking forward to things 
is half the pleasure of them,’ exclaimed 
Anne. ‘. . . Mrs. Lynde says, “Blessed are 
they who expect nothing for they shall 
not be disappointed.” But I think it would 
be worse to expect nothing than to be 
disappointed’” (Lucy Maud Montgomery, 
Anne of Green Gables, 1908). The proverb 
dates from the 1720s, when it was quoted 
by the writer Alexander Pope as “a ninth 
Beatitude” in some of his letters.
Variant of this proverb: expect noth-
ing and you won’t be disappointed.
blessed is the bride that the sun shines 
on See happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on.
blessings brighten as they take their 
fl ight  People often fail to appreciate 
the good things that they have until they 
lose them: “Blessings brighten as they take 
their fl ight. Katy began to appreciate for 
the fi rst time how much she had learned 
to rely on her aunt” (Susan Coolidge, 
What Katy Did, 1873). The proverb comes 
from the poem “Night Thoughts” (1742) 
by Edward Young.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
the cow knows not the value of her 
tail till she has lost it; you never miss 
the water till the well runs dry.
blind chance sweeps the world 
along  Life is governed by chance rather 
than by destiny: She believed in the saying 
“Blind chance sweeps the world along,” and was 
confi dent that her luck would change one of 
these days. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1948 in a U.S. proverb collection.
a blind man’s wife needs no paint  At-
tempts to improve the appearance of 
somebody or something are superfl uous 
when it is the true nature of the person 
or thing that is of value, or when the 
improvements will not be appreciated: 
The cosmetics industry would founder if every 
woman took on board the adage that a blind 
man’s wife needs no paint. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1659 in James Howell’s 
collection of proverbs.
blood is thicker than water  Bonds of 
loyalty and affection between members of 
the same family are much stronger than any 
other relationship: “Blood is thicker than 
water, my dear; and I know no earthly ties 
that can bind people together if those of 
family connection will not do so” (Anthony 
Trollope, Can You Forgive Her?, 1864). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1813, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
much earlier origin. Compare the 12th-
century German saying “sippebluot von was-
sere niht verdirbet [kin-blood is not spoiled 
by water].”
Variant of this proverb: blood is 
thicker than water, but sometimes it runs 
mighty thin.
the blood of the martyrs is the seed of 
the church  The martyrdom of early 
members of the Christian Church helped 
the religion to fl ourish and spread; also 
used more generally to point out that 
persecution and oppression often have the 
opposite effect to that intended: Bearing in 
blessed are they who expect nothing, for they shall not be disappointed
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   30 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
31
mind that the blood of the martyrs is the seed of 
the church, the government has adopted a less 
confrontational approach to the problem of eco-
terrorism. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1560, but with the implication that it was 
of earlier origin. The Christian theologian 
Tertullian (c. a.d. 160–c. 220) wrote, 
“semen est sanguis Christianorum [the blood 
of Christians is seed].”
blood will have blood  One act of 
violence provokes another, by way of 
revenge: Blood will have blood, and the par-
ents of the murdered child swore to hunt down 
and kill the man convicted of the crime if he 
was ever released from prison. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1559, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of bibli-
cal origin: “Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, 
by man shall his blood be shed” (Genesis 
9:6). It occurs in Shakespeare’s play Mac-
beth (3:4): “It will have blood; they say 
blood will have blood.”
blood will tell  Inherited characteris-
tics—whether good or bad—cannot be 
hidden forever: He launched himself into 
the attack with all the fi ghting instincts of 
his military forebears—as they say, blood will 
tell. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1850 in World a Mask by the 
American poet, playwright, and diplomat 
George Henry Boker.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what’s bred in the bone will come 
out in the flesh.
blue are the hills that are far away  Dis-
tant places or things seem more desir-
able than they are in reality; also applied 
to past or future events: When I hear my 
grandparents reminiscing about the carefree 
days of their youth, I am tempted to remind 
them of the saying “Blue are the hills that are 
far away.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in this form in 1902, but with the impli-
cation that it was already in common 
use.
Variant of this proverb: far away the 
hills are green.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: distance lends enchantment to 
the view.
blushing is a sign of grace  A person’s 
blushes may be interpreted as a proof of a 
good, sensitive character: “However, blush-
ing is some sign of grace” (Jonathan Swift, 
A Complete Collection of Polite and Ingenious 
Conversation, 1738). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1595 in A Quest of Enquirie.
Variant of this proverb: blushing is 
virtue’s color.
a book is like a garden carried in the 
pocket  A book can bring as much plea-
sure and contain as much variety as a 
garden, with the advantage that it can be 
carried with you wherever you go: “A book 
is like a garden carried in the pocket,” my uncle 
used to say as he took me to the local bookstore 
to choose my birthday present. The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
books and friends should be few and 
good  It is best to be selective both in 
your choice of reading and of friends: 
Those who ignore the maxim that books and 
friends should be few and good will fi nd they 
have neither the time nor the inclination to 
give proper attention to either. The proverb 
is thought to be of Spanish origin.
the boot is on the other foot  See the 
shoe is on the other foot.
 the boot is on the other foot
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   31 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
32
borrowing brings sorrowing  See he that 
goes a-borrowing, goes a-sorrowing.
both poverty and prosperity come from 
spending money—prosperity from spend-
ing it wisely  Spending money recklessly 
will make you poor, but spending it on 
things that are bound to yield a profi t or 
rise in value will make you rich: The two 
brothers inherited equal shares of their parents’ 
wealth, but one died penniless while the other 
amassed a considerable fortune. When asked 
the secret of his success, he would reply, “Both 
poverty and prosperity come from spending 
money—prosperity from spending it wisely.” 
The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
boys seldom make passes at girls who 
wear glasses  It is popularly believed 
that girls who wear glasses are less attrac-
tive to the opposite sex: She began to 
wonder whether the saying “Boys seldom make 
passes for girls who wear glasses” had been 
invented by the male sex so that their own 
physical shortcomings would not be observed 
too clearly by the nearsighted young women 
they met. The proverb occurs in a verse 
“News Item” by the journalist Dorothy 
Parker (1893–1967), “Men seldom make 
passes/At girls who wear glasses.” It has 
also been associated with the humorist 
Ogden Nash (1902–1971).
boys will be boys  Boys must be forgiven 
for their bad or boisterous behavior; also 
used ironically when grown men behave 
in an irresponsible or childish manner: 
“Aunt Sally was a good deal uneasy; but 
Uncle Silas he said there warn’t no occa-
sion to be—boys will be boys, he said, and 
you’ll see this one turn up in the morning 
all sound and right” (Mark Twain, Huck-
leberry Finn, 1884). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1601 in the form “Youth will 
be youthful.” Other words, such as girls or 
kids, may be used in place of boys.
brave men lived before Agamemnon 
People whose brave or noble exploits are 
not recorded in history or literature tend 
to be forgotten over the course of time: 
“Brave men were living before Agamem-
non/And since, exceeding valorous and 
sage” (Lord Byron, “Don Juan,” 1819). 
The proverb originated in the writings 
of the Roman poet Horace (65–8 b.c.): 
“Many brave men lived before Agamem-
non’s time; but they are all, unmourned 
and unknown, covered by the long night, 
because they lack their sacred poet.”
bread always falls buttered side 
down  In any situation, the least desir-
able of two or more possible outcomes 
is the one that will occur: Bread always 
falls buttered side down, so it seemed inevi-
table that the train would be delayed on the 
one day I had to get to work on time. First 
recorded in the mid-19th century, the 
proverb appears in a rhyme written by 
James Payn (as a parody of a more seri-
ous poem) and published in 1884: “I 
never had a piece of toast/Particularly 
long and wide,/But fell upon the sanded 
fl oor,/And always on the buttered side.” 
The diplomat Henry Kissinger is said 
to have remarked, “If you drop a piece 
of buttered bread on the carpet, the 
chances of its falling with the buttered 
side down are in direct relationship with 
the cost of the carpet.” The proverb—
or the phenomenon it describes—is 
popularly regarded as an illustration 
of Murphy’s Law, “If anything can go 
wrong, it will.”
borrowing brings sorrowing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   32 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
33
Variant of this proverb: the bread 
always falls on its buttered side.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if anything can go wrong, it will.
bread is the staff of life  Food is essen-
tial for survival: We must at least ensure 
that these people have enough money to buy 
basic food items—bread is the staff of life. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1638 in 
Penkethman, Artachthos.
brevity is the soul of wit  When you tell 
a joke or make a speech, you are most 
likely to please or impress your listeners 
if you keep it as short as possible; used to 
discourage long-windedness or encourage 
conciseness of expression: “Clinton is . . . 
given to garrulousness while brevity, they 
say, is the soul of wit” (Washington Post, 
1996). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Shakespeare’s play Hamlet (2:2), where it 
is used by Polonius, a character known 
for his verbosity. In this early instance the 
word wit means “wisdom,” but in modern 
usage it usually means “humor.” Dorothy 
Parker parodied the proverb when she 
wrote, in a caption for Vogue (1916), 
“Brevity is the soul of lingerie.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
length begets loathing.
a bribe will enter without knocking  The 
use of money enables access where it 
would otherwise be denied: He planned 
to use the money to buy his way into the great 
man’s presence, knowing that he would be 
refused admittance if he came empty-handed 
but also that a bribe will enter without knock-
ing. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1619 by B. Rich in Irish Hubbub: “Honesty 
stands at the gate and knockes, and brib-
ery enters in.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a golden key can open any door.
a bully is always a coward  Bullies only 
pick on those who are weaker than them-
selves and cannot fi ght back—they are 
afraid of everybody else: A bully is always a 
coward, and the girls stopped teasing her when 
they discovered that she was the principal’s 
niece. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in Charles Lamb, Essays of Elia 
(1820–23).
burn not your house to scare away 
the mice  Do not try to solve a minor 
problem by taking action that will cause 
much greater harm: Such a drastic step could 
destroy your whole business, and all because 
of one dissatisfi ed customer—don’t burn your 
house to scare away the mice. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
1615 in T. Adams, England’s Sickness.
Variant of this proverb: burn not 
your house to fright the mouse away.
a burnt child dreads the fi re  Somebody 
who has had an unpleasant experience 
thereafter shrinks from the cause of that 
experience: “In his savage taunting, he 
fl ared the candle so close at me, that I 
turned my face aside, to save it from 
the fl ame. ‘Ah!’ he cried, laughing, after 
doing it again, ‘the burnt child dreads the 
fi re!’” (Charles Dickens, Great Expecta-
tions, 1860–61). First recorded c. 1250 
with slightly different wording, the prov-
erb was used in its current form in John 
Lyly’s Euphues and His England (1580).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: once bitten, twice shy.
the busiest men have the most leisure 
People who are industrious by nature 
 the busiest men have the most leisure
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   33 1/29/07   5:12:21 PM
34
always seem to have the most spare time, 
either because they accomplish their work 
more quickly and effi ciently or because 
they cram so much into their busy lives: 
“The busiest men have always the most lei-
sure; and while discharging the multifari-
ous duties of a parish priest and a guardian 
he found time for travelling” (London Times 
Literary Supplement, 1911). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1884, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if you want something done, ask 
a busy person; idle people have the 
least leisure.
business before pleasure  It is best to 
get work or business matters out of the 
way before turning your attention to 
more pleasurable things: “Much as I adore 
your company, there is still business to 
attend to . . . and . . . business must come 
before pleasure” (James Jones, From Here 
to Eternity, 1951). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1767, in the form “Pleasure 
should always give way to business,” in 
Thomas Hutchinson’s Diary and Letters.
Variant of this proverb: pleasure fi rst 
and business after.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
work before play.
business is business  There is no room 
for sentiment in business: “Business is 
business, my dear young sir” (William 
Thackeray, The Virginians, 1857). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1797 by 
George Colman in The Heir at Law.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never mix business and pleasure.
business is like a car, it will not run by 
itself except downhill  You must take 
an active part in the day-to-day running 
of your business, or employ a competent 
person to do this for you, if you want it 
to be a success: He had only himself to blame 
for the failure of his company. Having used 
his inheritance to set it up, he then turned 
his attention to other things, forgetting the 
adage that business is like a car—it will not 
run by itself except downhill. The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
business neglected is business lost  In 
the world of commerce, you cannot afford 
to neglect any opportunity to do business: 
I have had a number of inquiries from potential 
customers, which must be followed up as soon as 
possible—business neglected is business lost.
the business of America is business 
Commercial activity is essential for Amer-
ica—or any other nation—to thrive and 
develop: The business of America is business, 
and even small companies such as these have an 
important place in our society. The proverb 
originated in a speech made in 1925 by 
President Calvin Coolidge: “After all, the 
chief business of the American people is 
business.”
busy folks are always meddling  It is in 
the nature of busy people to interfere in 
the affairs of others: Her tireless efforts to 
improve the morality of her neighbors led to 
dark mutterings to the effect that “busy folks 
are always meddling.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1721 by James Kelly in 
A Complete Collection of Scotish Proverbs.
the buyer needs a thousand eyes, the 
seller wants but one  A buyer must 
exercise great caution, and examine the 
goods thoroughly, to avoid being exploited 
business before pleasure
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   34 1/29/07   5:12:21 PM
35
by an unscrupulous seller: Tourists looking 
for bargains in the local markets would do well 
to remember the proverb “The buyer needs a 
thousand eyes, the seller wants but one.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1640 in 
George Herbert’s Outlandish Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: the buyer 
has need of a hundred eyes, the seller of 
but one.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let the buyer beware.
buy in the cheapest market and sell in 
the dearest  The golden rule of com-
merce is to buy a commodity for as 
little as possible and sell it for as much 
as possible: “‘To buy in the cheapest 
market and sell in the dearest’ was Mr. 
Badman’s common rule in business. 
. . . In Bunyan’s opinion it was knav-
ery in disguise” (J. A. Froude, Bunyan, 
1880). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Thomas Lodge’s A Fig for Momus (1595): 
“Buy cheape, sell deare.”
by learning to obey, you will know how 
to command  See he that cannot obey 
cannot command.
 by learning to obey, you will know how to command
