Caesar’s wife must be above suspicion 
Those in positions of importance—and 
their associates—must lead blameless 
lives and have spotless reputations: The 
president surrounded himself with aides and 
advisers of irreproachable character, know-
ing that Caesar’s wife must be above suspi-
cion. Julius Caesar is said to have made 
this remark when asked why he had 
divorced his wife (who was suspected 
of having been indirectly involved in a 
scandal).
calamity is the touchstone of a brave 
mind  It is at times of crisis that you fi nd 
out who the truly strong, courageous, or 
great people are: When the fi re broke out she 
immediately took charge of the situation, glad of 
a chance to prove her worth at last—calamity 
is the touchstone of a brave mind. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in 1602: “Calamity gives man a steddy 
heart” (John Marston, Antonio’s Revenge).
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: when the going gets tough, the 
tough get going.
call a man a thief and he will steal  Give 
a person a bad reputation and he or she 
may start to justify it. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1838 by Thomas Carlyle 
in Sartor Resartus: “In a very plain sense 
the proverb says, Call one a thief, and he 
will steal.”
call a spade a spade  Identify things by 
their real names; do not prevaricate about 
awkward truths; say what you mean: He 
was never afraid to call a spade a spade. The 
proverb was recorded in 1519 by William 
Rastell in The Four Elements, though it was 
also quoted by Erasmus.
call no man happy till he dies  However 
happy somebody seems to be, there is 
always the risk that he or she will be struck 
by sorrow or misfortune: “‘Call no man 
happy until he is dead.’ . . . He was sev-
enty-two, and yet there was still time for 
this dream . . . to change to a nightmare” 
(C. S. Forester, Hornblower and the Crisis, 
1967). Of ancient origin, the proverb has 
been attributed to the Athenian statesman 
Solon (c. 638–559 b.c.), who told the 
wealthy King Croesus, “Call no man happy 
before he dies, he is at best but fortunate.” 
Compare Sophocles (c. 496–405 b.c.), 
“Deem no man happy until he passes the 
end of his life without suffering grief.”
Variant of this proverb: call no man 
happy till he is dead.
can’t live with ’em, can’t live without 
’em  Some alternatives are equally 
c
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   36 1/29/07   5:12:21 PM
37
impossible (usually applied to a person’s 
male or female partner): That’s the trouble 
with women, can’t live with ’em, can’t live 
without ’em. The origins of the proverb 
are obscure, though it is thought to be of 
20th-century U.S. coinage.
cards are the devil’s tools  Card 
games—specifi cally those played for 
money—lead to trouble or evil: Hearing 
that a poker game was in progress, she burst 
into the room and knocked over the table where 
the players sat, exclaiming, “Cards are the dev-
il’s tools!” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1676 in Poor Robin’s Almanac in the form 
“Cards and dice . . . are the devil’s books 
and the devil’s bones.”
Variant of this proverb: cards are the 
devil’s books.
care is no cure  Worrying about some-
thing does nothing to put it right. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1590 by 
William Shakespeare in Henry VI Part 1 
(3:3): “Care is no cure, but rather cor-
rosive, for things that are not to be 
remedied.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: care killed the cat; it’s not work 
that kills, but worry.
care killed the cat  Too much wor-
rying can be injurious to your health: 
Relax and enjoy your holiday—care killed 
the cat! The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Shakespeare’s play Much Ado About Nothing 
(5:1), “Though care killed a cat, thou hast 
mettle enough in thee to kill care.” It is 
also used with the word care in the sense 
of “caution” or “loving attention.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: care is no cure; it’s not work 
that kills, but worry.
a cat can look at a king  Even the low-
liest people have the right to look at, or 
show an interest in, those of higher status 
or prestige; often used by somebody 
accused of staring insolently: “‘Don’t be 
impertinent,’ said the King, ‘and don’t 
look at me like that!’ He got behind Alice 
as he spoke. ‘A cat may look at a king,’ said 
Alice. ‘I’ve read that in some book, but I 
don’t remember where’” (Lewis Carroll, 
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, 1865). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in John Hey-
wood’s Dialogue of Proverbs in 1546. The 
French equivalent is “Un chien regarde bien 
un évêque [A dog can look at a bishop].”
Variant of this proverb: a cat may 
look at a king.
catching’s before hanging  Offenders 
can only be punished when or if they are 
caught: We all know what we would like to 
do to the culprit, but fi rst we have to fi nd out 
who it is—catching’s before hanging. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1818 in A. 
N. Royall’s Letters from Alabama.
catch not at the shadow and lose the 
substance  Do not allow yourself to be 
distracted from your main purpose by 
irrelevancies: “Like the dog in the fable, 
to throw away the substance in catching 
at the shadow” (Thomas Love Peacock, 
Nightmare Abbey, 1818). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1578 by John Lyly in 
Euphues: The Anatomy of Wit.
a cat has nine lives  Cats seem to be 
incredibly lucky or skillful at surviving 
or avoiding accidents: They say that a cat 
has nine lives, but if the one next door makes 
a habit of dozing off under my car it could 
fi nd itself using them up rather quickly. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in the 
 a cat has nine lives
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   37 1/29/07   5:12:21 PM
38
form “A woman has nine lives like a cat.” 
In 1894 two writers compared the lives of 
a cat with those of a lie: R. D. Blackmore 
wrote “If a cat has nine lives . . . a lie has 
ninety-nine,” and Mark Twain wrote “One 
of the most striking differences between 
a cat and a lie is that a cat has only nine 
lives.”
a cat in gloves catches no mice  It is 
sometimes necessary to be bold or ruth-
less, or to do unpleasant things, in order 
to achieve one’s ends: “Handle your Tools 
without Mittens; remember that the Cat in 
Gloves catches no Mice” (Benjamin Frank-
lin, Poor Richard’s Almanack, 1758). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in French in the 
14th century and in English in 1573.
a cat may look at a king  See a cat can 
look at a king.
the cat would eat fi sh, but would not wet 
her feet  You must be prepared to put up 
with personal inconvenience, discomfort, 
or risk in order to get what you want; 
often used when somebody is hesitant 
about doing something for this reason: 
Many people deny themselves their dream 
vacations because of a fear of fl ying—the cat 
would eat fi sh, but would not wet her feet. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
c. 1225. It is alluded to in Shakespeare’s 
play Macbeth (1:7), “Wouldst thou . . . live 
a coward in thine own esteem,/Letting ‘I 
dare not’ wait upon ‘I would,’/Like the 
poor cat i’ the adage?”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that would have eggs must endure 
the cackling of hens.
caution is the parent of safety  You 
must proceed with care, and take all 
the necessary precautions, if you want 
to avoid harm or injury: After listening to 
the weather forecast, we decided to postpone 
our sailing trip—caution is the parent of 
safety. This proverb is fi rst recorded in 
Benjamin Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Alma-
nack (1733).
a chain is no stronger than its weakest 
link  A weak part or member will affect 
the success or effectiveness of the whole: 
“To begin with, how can things so inse-
cure as the successful experiences of this 
world afford a stable anchorage? A chain 
is no stronger than its weakest link, and 
life is after all a chain” (William James, 
The Varieties of Religious Experience, 1902). 
The proverb was used in 1856 in a letter 
by Charles Kingsley in the form “nothing 
is stronger than its weakest part.” The fi rst 
recorded occurrence of the current form 
dates from 1868.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the thread breaks where it is 
weakest.
a change is as good as a rest  Doing 
something different for a time can be 
just as refreshing as taking a break from 
work; also used more generally of any 
change in routine: A change is as good 
as a rest, and after a couple of hours spent 
weeding the garden I returned to my desk 
with renewed inspiration. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1890: “One of our 
greatest statesmen has said that a change 
of work is the best rest. So it is” (Sir 
Arthur Conan Doyle, Lippincott’s Monthly 
Magazine).
Variant of this proverb: a change of 
work is a rest.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
variety is the spice of life.
a cat in gloves catches no mice
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   38 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
39
change not a clout till May be out  See 
ne’er cast a clout till may be out.
character is destiny  A person’s charac-
ter determines the way that his or her life 
will develop: “‘Character’—says Novalis, 
in one of his questionable aphorisms—
‘character is destiny.’ But not the whole 
of our destiny” (George Eliot, The Mill 
on the Floss, 1860). In this quotation, and 
elsewhere, the proverb is attributed to the 
German writer Friedrich Leopold von 
Hardenberg (1772–1801), whose pen-
name was Novalis. Others, however, have 
traced it back to the Greek philosopher 
Heraclitus (fi fth century b.c.).
charity begins at home  You should look 
after those nearest and dearest to you 
before you turn your attention to others 
further afi eld: “And hard it is upon the part 
of the law that it should be so confound-
edly down upon us unfortunate victims; 
when it takes such amazing good interest 
for itself from all its clients. But charity 
begins at home, and justice begins next 
door” (Charles Dickens, Martin Chuzzlewit, 
1843–44). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in this form in Beaumont and Fletcher’s 
play Wit Without Money (c. 1625), but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin: 
in the late 14th century John Wycliffe 
wrote, “Charity should begin at himself.”
Variant of this proverb: charity 
begins at home but should not end there.
charity covers a multitude of sins  A 
kind and loving person is prepared to 
forgive a great deal of wrongdoing; also 
used to imply that acts of charity may be 
used to cover up sinful behavior or ease a 
guilty conscience: “A cloak (on a woman’s 
back) is an emblem of charity—it cov-
ers a multitude of sins” (Wilkie Collins, 
The Moonstone, 1868). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “And above all things have 
fervent charity among yourselves: for 
charity shall cover the multitude of sins” 
(1 Peter 4:8). Other words may be used 
in place of charity: Louisa May Alcott 
wrote “beauty always covers a multitude 
of sins in a man’s eyes.”
charity is not a bone you throw to a dog 
but a bone you share with a dog  There 
should be more to charity than simply giv-
ing money or other material goods—it is 
better to establish a relationship with those 
in need and to work with them for the 
benefi t of all concerned: She spends much of 
her spare time working with the homeless, fi rmly 
believing that charity is not a bone you throw to 
a dog but a bone you share with a dog.
cheaters never prosper  Those who 
cheat—whether at school, at sports and 
games, or in business—may be initially 
successful but will ultimately suffer for 
their wrongdoing: He set out to disprove the 
saying “Cheaters never prosper,” and made a for-
tune selling fake works of art, but lost everything 
when his deception was discovered. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1805, in R. Parkin-
son, Tour in America in the form “Cheating 
never thrives,” but with the implication 
that it was already in general use.
Variants of this proverb: cheats never 
prosper; cheaters never win and winners 
never cheat.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
honesty is the best policy; honesty 
pays.
cheerful company shortens the 
miles  See good company on the road 
is the shortest cut.
 cheerful company shortens the miles
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   39 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
40
cheese digests all things but itself  Eat-
ing cheese at the end of a meal helps 
to digest what has gone before, but 
the cheese itself may prove to be indi-
gestible: I couldn’t resist helping myself 
to another slice of cheese, though I knew 
I would regret it later—cheese digests all 
things but itself. Of Latin origin, the 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
the 16th century: “Cheese . . . digesteth 
all things except itselfe” (John Lyly, Sap-
pho & Phao).
chickens always come home to 
roost  See curses, like chickens, come 
home to roost.
the child is father of the man  A child’s 
character is an indication of the type of 
adult he or she will become—human 
nature does not change from youth to 
maturity: “The lady who is my opponent 
is very persuasive, but what of her past? 
. . . They say the child is the father of 
the man” (Howard Fast, The Immigrant’s 
Daughter, 1985). The proverb originated 
in this form in William Wordsworth’s 
poem “My Heart Leaps Up” (1807), but 
it echoes a sentiment expressed by John 
Milton in Paradise Regained (1671): “The 
childhood shews the man.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
give me a child for the first seven years 
and he is mine for life.
a child on a giant’s shoulders sees fur-
ther of the two  See a dwarf on a 
giant’s shoulders sees further of the 
two.
children, fools, and drunkards tell the 
truth  See children and fools speak 
the truth.
children and fools speak the truth 
Children and foolish people have a ten-
dency to say what is true, because they 
have not learned that it may be advanta-
geous or diplomatic to do otherwise: 
Children and fools tell the truth, and Mat-
thew learned the hard way that it is sometimes 
expedient to lie. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, in Letters & Papers of Reign of 
Henry VIII (1537), but with the implica-
tion that it was of much earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: children, 
fools, and drunkards tell the truth.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
out of the mouths of babes and suck-
lings come great truths.
children are certain cares, but uncertain 
comforts  Children are bound to cause 
their parents anxiety, and may or may not 
also bring them joy: Those contemplating 
parenthood should bear in mind the saying 
“Children are certain cares, but uncertain 
comforts”—the pleasure I gain from having my 
kids around me is obliterated by the horrors I 
imagine when they don’t come home on time. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 in 
John Clarke, Parœmiologia Anglo-Latina.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: happy is he that is happy in his 
children.
children should be seen and not 
heard  In the company of adults, chil-
dren should not speak until they are spo-
ken to: “When he asks questions I can’t 
answer I’ll just tell him children should 
be seen and not heard” (Lucy Maud 
Montgomery, Anne of Avonlea, 1909). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1400 in the 
form “A maid [young woman] should be 
seen but not heard.” It was applied to chil-
dren from the early 19th century onward, 
cheese digests all things but itself
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   40 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
41
but it is now considered to be a rather 
old-fashioned notion.
the child that is born on the Sabbath 
day is bonny and blithe and good and 
gay  Children born on a Sunday are sup-
posed to be happy, healthy, good-looking, 
and well-behaved: I can’t believe that such a 
miserable, sickly little boy could have been born 
on a Sunday—I thought that children born 
on the Sabbath day were supposed to be “bonny 
and blithe and good and gay.” The proverb is 
the last line of a traditional rhyme begin-
ning “Monday’s child is fair of face.” See 
42
entries at the days of the week for other 
proverbs from this rhyme.
choose neither a woman nor linen by 
candlelight  See never choose your 
women or linen by candlelight.
choose the lesser of two evils  If you are 
forced to choose between two options, 
both of which are undesirable, all you can 
do is choose the one that is less undesir-
able than the other: Choose the lesser of two 
evils—if you tell her the truth she’ll be upset, 
but if she fi nds out later that you lied to her 
you could lose a friend for life. The proverb 
occurs in the writings of Aristotle and 
Cicero, and was fi rst recorded in Eng-
lish in Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde (c. 
1385). The U.S. actress Mae West paro-
died the proverb when she said, “Between 
two evils, I always pick the one I never 
tried before,” in the movie Klondike Annie 
(1936).
Variant of this proverb: of two evils 
choose the less.
Christmas comes but once a year  Ex-
travagance and self-indulgence at 
Christmas—or any other annual celebra-
tion—can be justifi ed by the fact that it is 
a relatively infrequent occurrence: All over 
the country, people will be eating and drink-
ing to excess, telling themselves that Christmas 
comes but once a year. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1557 in Thomas Tusser, A 
Hundreth good pointes of husbandrie.
the church is an anvil that has worn out 
many hammers  The Christian Church 
has proved strong enough in the past to 
resist criticism, attack, and persecution, 
and will continue to do so in the future: 
“The Church is an anvil which has worn 
out many hammers and the story of the 
fi rst collision is, in essentials, the story of 
all” (Alexander MacLaren, The Acts of the 
Apostles, 1908). The proverb is attributed 
to the theologian Theodore Beza, who 
made this remark in response to a mas-
sacre of Huguenots in 1562.
a church is God between four walls  A 
church is more than just a building—its 
inner space is fi lled with the divine pres-
ence: If a church is God between four walls, then 
this building, with its atmosphere of spirituality 
and devotion, must once have been a place of 
worship. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1948 in a U.S. proverb collection.
circumstances alter cases  The same 
general principle cannot be applied to 
every individual case, and what is right, 
good, or appropriate in one set of cir-
cumstances may be wrong in another: 
“On a table of immense size lay the bud-
get, piles of the Chamber records, open 
volumes of the ‘Moniteur,’ with passages 
carefully marked, to throw at the head of 
a Minister his forgotten words and force 
him to recant them, under the jeering 
plaudits of a foolish crowd incapable of 
perceiving how circumstances alter cases” 
(Honoré de Balzac, The Rise and Fall of 
César Birotteau, 1837). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1678.
civility costs nothing  You have nothing 
to lose by being polite: “‘You wretch’ (she 
says), ‘how did you come by this?’ I made 
her a low bow. I said, ‘Civility costs noth-
ing, ma’am; and sometimes buys a great 
deal’ ” (Wilkie Collins, Jezebel’s Daughter, 
1880). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1706 in J. Stevens’ A New Spanish and 
En glish Dictionary in the form “Civility is 
choose neither a woman nor linen by candlelight
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   42 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
43
worth much and costs little,” echoing the 
sentiment expressed in a French proverb 
of the late 15th century.
Variants of this proverb: courtesy 
costs nothing; politeness costs nothing 
and gains everything.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s nothing lost by civility.
a civil question deserves a civil 
answer  If somebody asks you some-
thing politely, you should respond in the 
same manner: I was tempted to tell her to 
mind her own business, but a civil question 
deserves a civil answer and I replied as politely 
as I could. The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
in its variant form, in 1853.
Variant of this proverb: give a civil 
answer to a civil question.
cleanliness is next to godliness  Per-
sonal hygiene indicates a pious or virtu-
ous nature; also used more generally to 
emphasize the importance of cleanness: 
Having been brought up to believe that clean-
liness is next to godliness, she was seriously 
concerned for the spiritual well-being of her 
roommate, who bathed only once a week. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in a sermon given by John Wesley 
in 1788, but the sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient Egyptian or Hebrew origin. 
In The Advancement of Learning (1605), 
Francis Bacon wrote, “Cleanness of body 
was ever esteemed to proceed from a due 
reverence to God.”
Variant of this proverb: cleanliness is 
akin to godliness.
a clear conscience can bear any trouble 
People who have done no wrong fi nd it 
easier to face the demands of the world 
than those who have guilty consciences: 
A clear conscience can bear any trouble, but 
there are limits even for the most guiltless. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1732 by 
Thomas Fuller in Gnomologia.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
do right and fear no man.
clergymen’s sons always turn out badly 
It might be expected that the children of 
ministers of religion should lead exem-
plary lives in adulthood, but the opposite 
is often the case—perhaps as a reaction 
against their early upbringing: “An Eton 
boy . . . when asked why the sons of Eli 
turned out badly, replied ‘The sons of 
clergymen always turn out badly’” (W. R. 
Inge, Outspoken Essays, 1922). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1885.
Variant of this proverb: a preacher’s 
son is often bad.
the clock goes as it pleases the clerk  It 
is up to civil servants and other bureau-
crats how time is governed and spent: 
They were kept waiting in reception for two 
hours, but the clock goes as it pleases the clerk, 
as they say. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1678 by John Ray in A Collection of 
English Proverbs.
a closed mouth catches no fl ies  See a 
shut mouth catches no flies.
the closer to the bone, the sweeter the 
meat  See the nearer the bone, the 
sweeter the flesh.
close sits my shirt, but closer my 
skin  See near is my shirt, but nearer 
is my skin.
clothes don’t make the man  You should 
not judge a person by the way he or she 
 clothes don’t make the man
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   43 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
44
is dressed: He was such a smartly dressed, 
well-groomed young man that I trusted him 
instantly—unlike some of the scruffy indi-
viduals who knock at our door offering their 
services. However, I was wrong—he cheated us 
out of all our savings, which just goes to prove 
that clothes don’t make the man.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a var-
let, though they be clad in silk or 
scarlet.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: clothes make the man; fine feath-
ers make fine birds.
clothes make the man  The style or 
quality of people’s clothing is often an 
indicator of their character, and also has a 
tendency to affect both the way that others 
judge them and the way that they behave: 
“It is truly miserable to behold how our 
youth even now is subjected to a fashion 
madness which helps to reverse the sense 
of the old saying: ‘Clothes make the man’ 
into something truly catastrophic” (Adolf 
Hitler, Mein Kampf, 1925). First recorded 
in English c. 1400, the proverb is of 
ancient origin and is echoed in other lan-
guages. The sentiment it expresses occurs 
frequently in literature, notably in Shake-
speare’s play Hamlet (1:3): “the apparel oft 
proclaims the man.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: fine feathers make fine birds; the 
tailor makes the man.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, 
though they be clad in silk or scar-
let; clothes don’t make the man.
the cobbler’s children go barefoot  See 
the shoemaker’s child always goes 
barefoot.
the cobbler should stick to his last  See 
let the cobbler stick to his last.
the cobbler to his last and the gunner to 
his linstock  See let the cobbler stick 
to his last.
a cock is mighty in his own back-
yard  See every cock will crow upon 
his own dunghill.
cold hands, warm heart  According to 
traditional belief, people whose hands feel 
cold to the touch are kind and affectionate 
by nature: He touched my cheek with his hand 
and I was reassured to feel the coolness of his 
fi ngers, despite the heat of the night—“cold 
hands, warm heart,” as my mother always says. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1903 in 
V.S. Lean, Collectanea.
come live with me and you’ll know me 
Nobody truly knows another person until 
they have spent some time living together: 
“Come live with me and you’ll know me,” they 
say, and how right they are! Sharing an apart-
ment with my friend for six months showed me 
what a selfi sh, moody person she really is, and 
now I understand why her parents threw her 
out of their house. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1925 in Sean O’Casey’s Juno 
and the Paycock, but is probably of much 
earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you never know a man until you live 
with him.
coming events cast their shadows 
before  Future events, especially those 
of some signifi cance, can often be pre-
dicted from the warning signs that pre-
cede them: “Everything in the world is in 
agitation. The signs of the times are omi-
clothes make the man
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   44 1/29/07   5:12:23 PM
45
nous. Coming events cast their shadows 
before. The Spirit of God is withdrawing 
from the earth, and calamity follows 
calamity by sea and by land” (Ellen G. 
White, The Desire of Ages, 1898). The 
proverb originated in this form in Thomas 
Campbell’s poem “Lochiel’s Warning” 
(1803), but the sentiment it expresses is 
of ancient origin.
a common danger causes common 
action  People are more willing to work 
together to avert danger when they all 
feel similarly threatened: We had little sup-
port for our campaign against the new legisla-
tion until it was discovered that every employee 
in the state would be adversely affected—a 
common danger causes common action. The 
proverb is recorded as a regional expres-
sion in the United States.
common fame is seldom to blame  Ru-
mors are rarely without substance, and 
if unpleasant things are being said about 
somebody, then that person has probably 
done something to deserve them: Common 
fame is seldom to blame, and nobody gets a 
reputation for lying if he or she has always told 
the truth. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1639 in J. Clarke, Parœmiologia Anglo-
Latina.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: there’s no smoke without fire; 
what everybody says must be true.
the company makes the feast  You will 
enjoy a meal or celebration far more if 
you are among cheerful friendly people, 
and the quality of the food and drink—or 
of the surroundings—is of lesser impor-
tance: As impoverished students we couldn’t 
afford to eat out anywhere better than the local 
burger bar, but I enjoyed those get-togethers far 
more than the business lunches I now have at 
the most expensive restaurant in town—the 
company makes the feast. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1653, in Izaak Walton’s 
The Compleat Angler.
comparisons are odious  People and 
things should be judged on the individual 
qualities they possess, rather than by com-
paring one with another: “Comparisons 
are odious; but I think that by the side of 
German English generally has the advan-
tage in expressiveness” (W. R. Inge, More 
Lay Thoughts, 1931). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English c. 1440, but a similar 
French proverb, translated as “Comparisons 
are hateful,” dates from a hundred years 
earlier. The malapropism “Comparisons are 
odorous” comes from Shakespeare’s play 
Much Ado about Nothing (3:5).
confess and be hanged  There is little 
incentive for confession when punish-
ment is the inevitable result; used as justi-
fi cation for not owning up to wrongdoing: 
“It is so easy, and apparently so natural, 
to deny what you cannot be easily con-
victed of, that a savage as well as a child 
lies to excuse himself, almost as instinc-
tively as he raises his hand to protect 
his head. The old saying, ‘confess and be 
hanged,’ carries much argument in it” (Sir 
Walter Scott, Chronicles of the Canongate, 
1827). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1589 in “Misophonus,” De Caede Gallorum 
Regis, but with the implication that it was 
already in general use.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: confession is good for the soul.
confession is good for the soul  Own-
ing up to wrongdoing will ease your 
conscience and make you feel better: 
 confession is good for the soul
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   45 1/29/07   5:12:23 PM
46
They say that confession is good for the soul, 
but I was reluctant to put my job on the line 
by admitting to such an egregious mistake. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1641 in 
David Fergusson’s Scottish Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: open confes-
sion is good for the soul. 
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: confess and be hanged.
conscience does make cowards of us 
all  People troubled by their conscience 
often reveal their guilt by acting in an 
uncharacteristically fearful manner: Her 
reluctance to testify in court made me suspi-
cious. Conscience does make cowards of us 
all, and I began to wonder if the whole 
story was just a fi gment of her imagination. 
The proverb originated in this form in 
Shakespeare’s play Hamlet (3:1), and is 
sometimes still used in a way that is closer 
to the original meaning, namely, that 
people often use scruples of conscience as 
an excuse for not taking bold action that 
may have unpleasant results.
Variant of this proverb: conscience 
makes cowards of us all.
conscience gets a lot of credit that 
belongs to cold feet  Something com-
mended as an act of conscience may be 
simply due to cowardice or loss of nerve: 
Everybody thought the governor had decided to 
keep the school open because it was the right 
thing to do, but it seems he was just afraid of 
the political backlash if he closed it—con-
science gets a lot of credit that belongs to cold 
feet. The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
conscience makes cowards of us all  See 
conscience does make cowards of us 
all.
consistency is the hobgoblin of little 
minds  See a foolish consistency is 
the hobgoblin of little minds.
constant dropping wears away a 
stone  It is often possible to achieve a 
major purpose—for example, persuad-
ing people or breaking down their resis-
tance—by a series of small but persistent 
actions or remarks: “. . . notwithstanding 
the proverb that constant dropping will 
wear away a stone, you may set your mind 
at rest that these people never will—never 
would, in a hundred years—impair your 
ground with Miss Havisham, in any par-
ticular, great or small” (Charles Dickens, 
Great Expectations, 1860–61). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in the 13th century, 
with different wording, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin. Compare 
Tibullus (c. 48–19 b.c.), “longa dies molli 
saxa peredit aqua [length of time eats away 
stones with soft water].”
Variant of this proverb: constant 
dripping wears away a stone.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
little strokes fell great oaks.
a constant guest is never welcome  Visi-
tors who turn up too frequently will fi nd 
they are no longer welcome: They appeared 
to have forgotten the old warning that a con-
stant guest is never welcome. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1732 by Thomas 
Fuller in Gnomologia.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: fish and guests stink after three 
days; short visits make long friends.
a contented mind is a continual 
feast  Those who are satisfi ed with their 
lot in life are far happier than those who 
are constantly striving for something bet-
conscience does make cowards of us all
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   46 1/29/07   5:12:23 PM
47
ter: “‘. . . although I take fi fty pounds a 
year here after taking above two hundred 
elsewhere, I prefer it to running the risk of 
having my old domestic experiences raked 
up against me, as I should do if I tried to 
make a move.’ ‘Right you are. A contented 
mind is a continual feast’” (Thomas Hardy, 
Jude the Obscure, 1895). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1535 in the form “A quiet 
heart is a continual feast” (Miles Cover-
dale, Bible Proverbs [15:15]).
Variant of this proverb: a contented 
mind is a perpetual feast.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
content is more than a kingdom.
content is more than a kingdom  Con-
tentment is more valuable than material 
riches: To those who face a friendless and 
lonely death content must surely be worth 
more than a kingdom. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1591 in the works of Robert 
Greene.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: a contented mind is a continual 
feast.
corporations have neither bodies to be 
punished nor souls to be damned  Large 
or ganizations are accountable to nobody—
unlike individual people, who can be made 
to suffer physically or mentally for their 
unjust or immoral behavior: The company 
acted unethically, but stayed within the law, so 
there was nothing that anybody could do about 
it—corporations have neither bodies to be 
punished nor souls to be damned. The proverb 
is attributed to Lord Chancellor Thurlow, 
who is said to have made this or a similar 
remark c. 1775—a variant of the original 
quotation is “Did you ever expect a cor-
poration to have a conscience, when it has 
no soul to be damned, and no body to be 
kicked.” This sentiment was, however fi rst 
expressed c. 1580 or earlier.
corruption will fi nd a dozen alibis for its 
evil deeds  Those who are guilty of cor-
ruption are so lacking in integrity that they 
will not hesitate to make excuses for or lie 
about what they have done: We knew that 
the offi cials had been accepting bribes, but we 
could not impeach them without more concrete 
evidence—corruption will fi nd a dozen alibis 
for its evil deeds. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
councils of war never fi ght  When a 
number of people get together to discuss 
something important, they rarely decide 
on a drastic course of action: As soon as I 
heard that a committee had been set up to dis-
cuss the issue, I knew I could rest assured that 
no action would be taken—it’s well known 
that councils of war never fi ght. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1863, in H. W. Hal-
leck, Telegram, but with the implication 
that it was already in general use.
courage is fear that has said its 
prayers  A brave person is not necessar-
ily fearless, but has drawn strength from 
religion or some other source: I admired 
her bravery in facing up to the bullies. “I’m 
not really brave,” she replied, “courage is simply 
fear that has said its prayers.” The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
the course of true love never did run 
smooth  Even the most loving relation-
ship has its ups and downs; usually said 
when lovers have a minor quarrel or face 
a temporary obstacle to their happiness: 
“Ralph’s letter was a long, involved . . . 
document, beginning with another string 
 the course of true love never did run smooth
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   47 1/29/07   5:12:23 PM
48
of apologies, repeating most of what he 
had said, and going over all their past. 
Quite a valuable essay on the theme of 
the course of true love never did run 
smooth, Etta thought sardonically” (Rich-
ard Aldington, Women Must Work, 1934). 
The proverb comes from Shakespeare’s 
play A Midsummer Night’s Dream (1:1).
Variant of this proverb: the path of 
true love never runs smooth.
courtesy costs nothing  See civility 
costs nothing.
courtesy is contagious  If you are polite 
to other people, then they will be polite 
to you: Courtesy is contagious, and if you start 
treating your staff with a bit more respect you 
may be pleasantly surprised by the results. The 
proverb is recorded as a regional expres-
sion in the United States.
cowards die many times before their 
death  Cowards who repeatedly fear for 
their lives are constantly suffering an 
experience similar to death itself; also 
used fi guratively of the ignominy of cow-
ardly behavior: His courage failed him when 
he saw the size of the boat—cowards die many 
times before their death, but he found that 
prospect infi nitely preferable to the possible 
consequences of setting sail on the ocean in 
such a frail craft. The proverb comes from 
Shakespeare’s play Julius Caesar (2:2), 
“Cowards die many times before their 
deaths;/The valiant never taste of death 
but once.”
Variant of this proverb: the coward 
dies a thousand deaths, the brave but 
one.
the cow knows not the value of her tail 
till she has lost it  People often fail to 
appreciate the value of their attributes or 
possessions until they have them no more; 
also used when the kindness of friends is 
spurned or taken for granted: You may live 
to regret responding so ungraciously to their 
offers of help—the cow knows not the value 
of her tail till she has lost it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, in Randle Cotgrave, A 
Dictionary of the French and English Tongues 
with different wording, in the early 17th 
century.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
blessings brighten as they take their 
flight; you never miss the water till 
the well runs dry.
the cowl does not make the monk  Do 
not judge a person’s character by his 
or her outward appearance or behavior: 
“Such impostures are sure of support from 
the sort of people . . . who think that it is 
the cowl that makes the monk” (George 
Bernard Shaw, Music in London, 1932). Of 
medieval Latin origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in Thomas Usk’s 
Testament of Love (1387), in the form “For 
habit maketh no monk; ne weringe of 
gilte spurres maketh no knight.”
Variant of this proverb: the habit 
does not make the monk.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t judge a book by its cover; 
judge not according to appearances.
a creaking door hangs longest  Those 
who have many minor ailments and infi r-
mities often outlive those who don’t: Fac-
ing the prospect of yet another operation—this 
time to replace an arthritic knee—she con-
soled herself with the saying that a creaking 
door hangs longest. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1776 in T. Cogan, John Buncle, 
Junior.
courtesy costs nothing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   48 1/29/07   5:12:23 PM
49
Variants of this proverb: a creaking 
door never falls from its hinges; a creaking 
gate hangs longest.
cream always comes to the top  People 
of great worth or quality will ultimately 
enjoy high achievement or public recog-
nition: “Never mind the cream: it will 
always rise to the top. It’s the skim milk 
that needs good teachers” (Bel Kaufman, 
Up the Down Staircase, 1964). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1841, in an essay by 
Ralph Waldo Emerson.
Variant of this proverb: cream always 
rises to the top.
crime doesn’t pay  Criminal activity 
may seem to be profi table, at least in the 
short term, but it ultimately leads to far 
greater loss—of liberty, or even of life; 
used as a deterrent slogan: It’s hard to 
believe that crime doesn’t pay when you read of 
the luxurious lives some of these criminals lead 
in exile. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
the early 20th century. The proverb’s fi rst 
citation is 1927 in N. Martin’s Mosaic. The 
expression was a slogan of the FBI and the 
cartoon detective Dick Tracy.
crime must be concealed by crime  One 
crime often leads to another, committed 
to avoid detection of the fi rst: Crime must 
be concealed by crime, and after embezzling the 
funds he had to construct an elaborate network 
of lies to explain where the money had gone. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1948 in 
a U.S. proverb collection.
criticism is something you can avoid 
by saying nothing, doing nothing, and 
being nothing  Whatever you say or do, 
somebody is bound to criticize you for it: 
If you want to achieve anything in life, you 
must learn how to handle criticism, because it 
is virtually impossible to avoid it—criticism is 
something you can avoid only by saying noth-
ing, doing nothing, and being nothing. The 
proverb is recorded as a regional expres-
sion in the United States.
crosses are ladders that lead to heaven 
Suffering and misfortune often bring out 
the best in a person’s character: “If there 
be real worth in the character . . . it 
will give forth its fi nest fragrance when 
pressed. ‘Crosses’ says the old proverb, 
‘are ladders that lead to heaven’” (Samuel 
Smiles, Self-Help, 1859). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1616, in Thomas Draxe’s 
Adages.
cross the stream where it is shallowest 
Always take the easiest possible approach 
to doing something: Why do you have to 
make things so diffi cult for yourself? “Cross 
the stream where it is shallowest,” as my 
mother used to say. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1603, but with the implica-
tion that it was already in regional use 
in England.
a crow doesn’t pick out the eye of 
another crow  See hawks will not pick 
out hawks’ eyes.
the cure may be worse than the disease 
See the remedy may be worse than the 
disease.
curiosity killed the cat  Inquisitive-
ness—or a desire to fi nd out about some-
thing—can lead you into trouble; usually 
said in response to an importunate ques-
tion: “The townspeople had learned the 
hard way that curiosity killed the cat—
you stayed indoors if there was trouble” 
 curiosity killed the cat
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   49 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
50
(Timothy Mo, The Redundancy of Courage, 
1991). The proverb seems to be of com-
paratively recent origin, having been fi rst 
recorded in 1909 in Henry, Schools and 
Schools.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
ask me no questions and i’ll tell you 
no lies.
curses, like chickens, come home to 
roost  Wrongdoers ultimately have to 
suffer the consequences of their bad deeds; 
also used when those who have wished 
evil on others are struck by misfortune 
themselves: “Their injustice will return 
upon them. Curses, like chickens, come 
home to roost” (Samuel Smiles, Duty, 
1880). The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in Chaucer’s Can-
terbury Tales (c. 1390). In the play The 
Tragedy of Mr Arden of Feversham (1592), of 
unknown authorship, a different simile is 
used: curses are compared to “arrowes 
shot upright,” which come back down on 
the shooter’s head.
Variant of this proverb: chickens 
always come home to roost.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what goes around, comes around.
the customer is always right  In order 
to maintain goodwill in business, you 
should always do what your customers 
want and give them the benefi t of the 
doubt in any dispute: The company gained 
its position as market leader by observing the 
principle that the customer is always right. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in 1917 as a translation of the French 
proverb “Le patron n’a jamais tort [The cus-
tomer is never wrong].” It has been attrib-
uted to various businessmen, including 
César Ritz (1850–1918) and H. Gordon 
Selfridge (1864–1947).
cut your coat according to your 
cloth  Match your actions to your 
resources, and do not try to live beyond 
your means; also used as in the following 
quotation: “We must cut our coat accord-
ing to our cloth and adapt ourselves to 
changing circumstances” (W. R. Inge, Lay 
Thoughts of a Dean, 1926). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1546.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
everybody stretches his legs accord-
ing to the length of his coverlet; 
stretch your arm no further than 
your sleeve will reach.
curses, like chickens, come home to roost