51
the danger past and God forgotten  Peo-
ple are prone to calling on God in times 
of trouble, only to forget all about their 
newly found religious faith as soon as the 
crisis is past: “The danger past, both are 
alike requited;/God is forgotten, and 
the soldier slighted” (T. Jordan, Epigram, 
1685). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1611 by Randle Cotgrave in A Dictionary 
of the French and English Tongues.
Variant of this proverb: the danger 
past God is forgotten; the river past and 
God forgotten.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
man’s extremity is god’s opportunity.
the darkest cloud has a silver lining  See 
every cloud has a silver lining.
the darkest hour is just before 
dawn  Things are often at their worst 
just before they begin to improve: When 
my fellow-campaigners began to lose heart, 
I reminded them of the proverb, “The darkest 
hour is just before dawn,” confi dent that victory 
was now within our grasp. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1650 in Thomas Fuller’s 
Pisgah Sight.
Variant of this proverb: it’s always 
darkest before dawn.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: after a storm comes a calm; when 
things are at the worst they begin to 
mend.
the day is short and the work is long  Life 
is short and there is little time in which to 
get work done: We must apply ourselves to 
our labour, for the day is short and the work 
is long. The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 
1400 in Beryn.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
art is long and life is short.
a dead dog tells no tales  See dead men 
tell no tales.
dead men don’t bite  A dead person can 
no longer do others any harm; often used 
to justify murder: “Then, with a pistol 
in either hand, I addressed him. ‘One 
more step, Mr. Hands,’ said I, ‘and I’ll 
blow your brains out! Dead men don’t 
bite, you know,’ I added with a chuckle” 
(Robert Louis Stevenson, Treasure Island, 
1883). The proverb is of ancient origin: 
according to Plutarch, the Egyptians were 
advised to kill Pompey for this reason in 
48 b.c. It was fi rst recorded in English c. 
1547 in the form “A dead man does no 
harm.” In 1587 Lord Gray is said to have 
advocated the execution of Mary Queen 
of Scots with the words, “A dead woman 
bites not.”
d
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   51 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
52
dead men tell no tales  It may be expe-
dient to kill somebody who could betray 
a secret or give information about the 
criminal activities of others: “. . . in 
fi ve minutes’ time the yacht will be 
scuttled, and the cabin hatch will be 
nailed down on you. Dead men tell no 
tales; and the sailing-master’s notion is 
to leave proofs afl oat that the vessel has 
foundered with all on board” (Wilkie 
Collins, Armadale, 1866). The proverb 
was first recorded in 1664 in J. Wilson 
Andronicus Comnenius.
Variant of this proverb: a dead dog 
tells no tales.
a deaf husband and a blind wife are 
always a happy couple  A recipe for a 
successful marriage is one in which the 
husband is deaf to his wife’s constant 
chatter or nagging and the wife is blind 
to her husband’s physical shortcomings or 
misdeeds: Conjugal harmony requires toler-
ance on both sides—there is some truth in the 
old saying that “A deaf husband and a blind 
wife are always a happy couple.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded with wording close to 
the current form in 1637: “Then marriage 
may be said to be past in all quietnesse, 
When the wife is blind, and the husband 
deafe” (T. Heywood, Pleasant Dialogues). 
An earlier citation (1578) recommends 
that the man be blind and the woman 
deaf.
death before dishonor  See better death 
than dishonor.
death defi es the doctor  All patients will 
eventually die, whatever the doctors do: 
We can keep the old lady alive for months, but 
not indefi nitely: in the end death always defi es 
the doctor. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1721 in James Kelly’s A Complete Collec-
tion of Scottish Proverbs.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
medicine can prolong life, but death 
will seize the doctor, too; there’s a 
remedy for everything except death.
death is the great leveler  People of 
all ranks and classes are equal in death, 
and nobody is exempt from dying: The 
list of those who perished in the hotel fi re—
everybody from visiting dignitaries and fi lm 
stars to porters and cleaning staff—pro-
vided a sobering illustration of the adage 
“Death is the great leveler.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English in 1732, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of 
ancient origin. Compare Claudian (a.d. 
340–410), “omnia mors aequat [death lev-
els all things].” Other words have been 
substituted for death, such as religion, golf, 
AIDS, or the Internet.
Variant of this proverb: death is a 
great leveler.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
equality begins in the grave.
death keeps no calendar  Death can 
strike at any time: Death keeps no cal-
endar, which is why many people follow the 
philosophy of living every day as if it were 
their last. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1640 in George Herbert’s Outlandish 
Proverbs.
death pays all debts  The dead no lon-
ger have any obligations, fi nancial or oth-
erwise, to the living: “‘It must be sorely 
answered,’ said the peace-offi cer. ‘Never 
you mind that—death pays all debts; 
it will pay that too’” (Sir Walter Scott, 
Chronicles of the Canongate, 1827). The 
proverb occurs in Shakespeare’s play The 
dead men tell no tales
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   52 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
53
Tempest (3:3) in the form “He that dies 
pays all debts” (1597–98).
deeds, not words  What a person does is 
more important than—and may be quite 
different from—what he or she says: My 
boss has an infuriating habit of interrupting my 
lengthy excuses and explanations with the curt 
remark, “Deeds, not words.” The proverb origi-
nated in the Latin form “Facta, non verba.” It 
occurs in various forms in Shakespeare’s 
plays, such as these lines from Henry VIII 
(3:2): “‘’Tis a kind of good deed to say 
well:/And yet words are no deeds.”
deeds are fruits, words are but 
leaves  Mere words have no value unless 
they are followed by positive action: The 
new governor would do well to remember 
the proverb “Deeds are fruits, words are but 
leaves”—his predecessor promised to tackle the 
problem of juvenile crime, but nothing was ever 
done. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1616 in Thomas Draxe’s Adages.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
actions speak louder than words.
delays are dangerous  Hesitation or 
procrastination may lead to trouble or 
disaster: “‘My dear fellow, delays are dan-
gerous. Let us have done with suspense, 
and risk it, the day after to-morrow’” 
(Wilkie Collins, Queen of Hearts, 1859). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1578 
in the form “Delays breed dangers” (John 
Lyly, Euphues).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he who hesitates is lost.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: there’s luck in leisure.
deny self for self’s sake  You can do 
yourself a favor by not satisfying your 
every desire or indulging your every 
whim—self-denial and unselfi shness can 
be benefi cial to the body and soul: A 
recent survey seemed to suggest that those 
who occasionally “deny self for self’s sake” live 
longer, happier lives. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1735, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
desert and reward seldom keep company 
People are often not rewarded for their 
good deeds or meritorious behavior; con-
versely, those who do receive rewards 
have often done nothing to deserve them: 
You will fi nd that in this organization desert 
and reward seldom keep company, so do not 
expect your efforts to be recognized or appreci-
ated by those in high places. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1670 in John 
Ray’s A Collection of English Proverbs.
desires are nourished by delays  A wish 
or desire becomes stronger if it is not 
satisfi ed immediately: I had hoped that he 
would lose interest in going on the expedition 
if I made him wait until the end of the school 
year, but desires are nourished by delays and he 
is now more enthusiastic than ever. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1601, in Love’s 
Metamorphosis by John Lyly.
desperate diseases must have desperate 
remedies  Drastic action is called for—
and justifi ed—when you fi nd yourself in a 
particularly diffi cult situation: “and there 
the King . . . asked him how he could have 
the heart to intend to destroy so many 
innocent people? ‘Because,’ said Guy 
Fawkes, ‘desperate diseases need desper-
ate remedies’” (Charles Dickens, A Child’s 
History of England, 1851–53). Of ancient 
origin, the proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1539 in Richard Taverner’s 
 desperate diseases must have desperate remedies
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   53 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
54
Proverbs in the form “A strong disease 
requires a strong medicine.” Compare the 
Latin proverb “extremis malis extrema reme-
dia [extreme remedies for extreme ills].” 
The substitution of desperate for strong or 
extreme may have been infl uenced by a 
quotation from Shakespeare’s play Ham-
let (4:3): “Diseases desperate grown/By 
desperate appliance are relieved,/Or not 
at all.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
killing no murder.
the devil always leaves a stink behind 
him  Evil always leaves its taint behind: 
He exerted a baleful infl uence on everyone he 
knew and, like the devil, always left a stink 
behind him. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1591 in Henry Smith’s Sermons.
the devil can cite scripture for his pur-
pose  Passages from the Bible are some-
times quoted to support a bad idea, to 
justify wrongdoing, or simply as a hypo-
critical show of piety; used in response 
to, or as a warning against, people who 
do this: Her argument was very persuasive, and 
she reminded me of a remark on the subject that 
Jesus made to his disciples in the New Testa-
ment, but I remained wary—the devil can cite 
scripture for his purpose. The proverb comes 
from Shakespeare’s play The Merchant of 
Venice (1:3). It alludes to Jesus’ tempta-
tion in the wilderness (Matthew 4:6), 
when the devil quotes Psalm 91:11–12: 
“If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself 
down: for it is written, He shall give His 
angels charge concerning thee: and in 
their hands they shall bear thee up, lest 
at any time thou dash thy foot against a 
stone.”
Variant of this proverb: the devil can 
quote scripture to his own advantage.
the devil dances in an empty pocket 
The poor are easily tempted to do evil. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1412 
by Thomas Hoccleve in The Regiment of 
Princes. The fuller version of the proverb 
runs “the devil dances in an empty pocket 
because it contains no cross” (a reference 
to the cross that adorned the coinage in 
past centuries): “No devil so frightful as 
that which dances in the pocket where 
there is no cross to keep him out” (Walter 
Scott, Woodstock, 1826).
Proverb expressing a similar mean-
ing: the devil finds work for idle 
hands to do.
the devil fi nds work for idle hands to do 
Idle people may fi nd themselves tempted 
into wrongdoing: “There is a risk that 
youngsters will leave school and college 
to fi nd themselves unwanted, with the 
devil fi nding work for idle hands to do” 
(London Times, 1980). The proverb comes 
from a poem by Isaac Watts, published 
in his Divine Songs for Children (1715): “In 
works of labour, or of skill,/I would be 
busy too;/ For Satan fi nds some mischief 
still/For idle hands to do.” In Charles 
Dickens’s novel David Copperfi eld (1850), 
the character Mr. Wickfi eld observes, “if 
Doctor Watts knew mankind, he might 
have written, with as much truth, ‘Satan 
fi nds some mischief still, for busy hands 
to do.’ The busy people achieve their full 
share of mischief in the world, you may 
rely upon it.”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
the devil dances in an empty pocket; 
an idle brain is the devil’s workshop; 
idleness is the root of all evil.
the devil gets up to the belfry by the 
vicar’s skirts  Wicked people may oper-
the devil always leaves a stink behind him
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   54 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
55
ate among good people in order to enact 
their schemes. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1659 in J. Howell’s Paro-
emiographia: “By the skirts of the Vicar the 
Devil climes up to the Steeple.”
Variant of this proverb: the devil 
lurks behind the cross.
the devil is in the details  The details 
of something are of paramount impor-
tance, and you should always examine 
or pay attention to them in any proposi-
tion you are considering or any proj-
ect you undertake: Read the contract very 
carefully before you sign. Remember that the 
devil is in the details, and there may be hid-
den drawbacks or unacceptable conditions that 
are not immediately apparent. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English as recently 
as the 1970s, and it may be of German, 
French, or Italian origin. It has been attrib-
uted to the Renaissance artist Michelan-
gelo (1475–1564) and the French writer 
Gustave Flaubert (1821–80), among 
others.
Variant of this proverb: God is in 
the details.
the devil is not as black as he is 
painted  People are rarely as bad 
as others say they are; often used in 
defense of a specifi c person: “Again, 
it cannot be gainsaid that the greater 
number of those who hold high places 
in our poetical literature are absolute 
nincompoops—fellows alike innocent 
of reason and of rhyme. But neither are 
we all brainless, nor is the devil himself 
so black as he is painted” (Edgar Allan 
Poe, The Quacks of Helicon, 1850). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1534, but 
with the implication that it was already 
in general use.
the devil looks after his own  Bad or 
undeserving people often prosper and 
thrive; said in response to the success or 
good fortune of such a person: She lied 
and cheated her way through college, and 
now she has risen to the very pinnacle of her 
profession—the devil looks after his own! 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1721, 
with slightly different wording, in James 
Kelly’s collection of Scottish proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: the devil 
takes care of his own.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the devil’s children have the devil’s 
luck.
the devil lurks behind the cross  See 
the devil gets up to the belfry by the 
vicar’s skirts.
the devil makes his Christmas pies of 
lawyers’ tongues and clerks’ fi ngers 
Beware of unscrupulous lawyers and their 
assistants: In commercial disputes my father was 
always anxious to steer clear of litigation, on the 
basis of the saying “The devil makes his Christ-
mas pies of lawyers’ tongues and clerks’ fi ngers.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1591, in 
John Florio’s conversation manual Second 
Fruits, with the implication that a third 
ingredient of the devil’s pie is women.
the devil’s children have the devil’s 
luck  Bad people often have good luck; 
usually said with envy rather than malice 
on hearing of somebody’s good fortune: I 
might have guessed that Richard would win the 
jackpot—the devil’s children have the devil’s 
luck! The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1678 in John Ray’s A Collection of English 
Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the devil looks after his own.
 the devil’s children have the devil’s luck
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   55 1/29/07   5:12:25 PM
56
the devil takes care of his own  See the 
devil looks after his own.
the devil was sick, the devil a saint would 
be; the devil was well, the devil a saint 
was he  People often turn to religion 
or promise to reform when they are 
ill or in trouble, only to revert to their 
former ways as soon as the crisis is over: 
The prisoner’s remorse seemed genuine, but the 
authorities were reluctant to release him, on the 
grounds that “the devil was sick, the devil a saint 
would be.” The word monk is used in place 
of saint in a medieval Latin form of the 
proverb and in its earliest English citation 
in 1629 in a sermon by Thomas Adams. 
The closing phrase “the devil a saint was 
he” means “he was not a saint at all.”
diamond cuts diamond  The only match 
for a very sharp-witted or cunning person 
is somebody of equally sharp wit or great 
cunning: She thought she had outwitted me, 
but diamond cuts diamond, and I still had a 
few tricks up my sleeve. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1604 in John Marston 
The Malcontent.
diet cures more than doctors  A sensible 
diet does more for the health than medi-
cal intervention: Her grandfather always 
insisted that diet cures more than doctors and 
never entered a hospital in his life. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1875 by A. B. 
Cheales in Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the best doctors are dr. diet, dr. 
quiet, and dr. merryman.
different strokes for different 
folks  Different people have different 
habits, methods, and tastes; also (and 
perhaps originally) used to suggest that 
different people must be approached or 
dealt with in different ways: “He dictates 
everything he writes. . . . I write out 
everything. Different strokes for different 
folks” (Alexandra Stoddard, Gift of a Letter, 
1990). The proverb is of U.S. origin, dat-
ing from the mid-20th century or earlier.
the diffi cult is done at once, the impos-
sible takes a little longer  Diffi cult 
tasks present no problem, and even those 
that seem impossible will ultimately be 
accomplished; used as a motto or policy 
statement, as in commerce: Our company 
has an excellent record of success in track-
ing down rare or out-of-print books, but we 
urge our customers to be patient—“The dif-
fi cult is done at once, the impossible takes a 
little longer.” Used as a slogan of the armed 
forces, the proverb is attributed to Louis 
XVI’s fi nance minister Charles Alexandre 
de Calonne (1734–1802). It was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1873.
dig the well before you are thirsty  Do 
not wait until it is too late to prepare for 
future necessities: He had worked out a pos-
sible escape route in case things went wrong, 
on the principle that it is better to dig the well 
before you are thirsty. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1948 in a U.S. proverb col-
lection, but it is believed to be of ancient 
origin. The Roman dramatist Plautus (c. 
254–184 b.c.) is said to have remarked, 
“It’s a wretched business to be digging a 
well just as thirst is overcoming you.”
Variant of this proverb: dig a well 
before it rains.
diligence is the mother of good 
luck  Those who work hardest are most 
likely to enjoy good fortune: “Diligence 
is the mother of good luck. . . . A man’s 
the devil takes care of his own
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   56 1/29/07   5:12:25 PM
57
success in life will be proportionate to 
his efforts” (Samuel Smiles, Thrift, 1875). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1591 in 
W. Stepney’s Spanish Schoolmaster.
dirty water will quench fi re  You cannot 
afford to be too fastidious at a time of great 
necessity; often used with specifi c refer-
ence to the satisfaction of sexual desire 
with a partner of ugly appearance or loose 
morals: “‘How could anyone go with her?’ 
Dewi shrugged. ‘They do say dirty water 
puts out fi re just as well’” (Alison G. Taylor, 
Simeon’s Bride, 1995). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546 in the form “Foul water 
as soon as fair, will quench hot fi re.”
discretion is the better part of valor  It 
is often wiser to avoid taking an unneces-
sary risk than to be recklessly courageous: 
“You have shown the discretion which 
is the better part of valour . . . had you 
attacked Sir Richard, you would now be 
lying senseless on the greensward, quite 
unable to undertake the journey that lies 
before you tomorrow” (L. P. Hartley, 
Eustace and Hilda, 1947). The proverb 
comes from Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, 
Part 1 (5:4): “The better part of valour is 
discretion; in the which better part, I have 
saved my life” (1597–98). The sentiment 
it expresses, however, is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he who fights and runs away may live 
to fight another day.
distance lends enchantment to the 
view  Distance in space or time makes 
things seem better than they are—or 
were—in reality: I remember college life as 
a happy, carefree existence, but distance lends 
enchantment to the view, and reading the dia-
ries I wrote during those years has brought back 
many painful memories. The proverb comes 
from Thomas Campbell’s poem “Pleasures 
of Hope” (1799): “’Tis distance lends 
enchantment to the view,/And robes the 
mountain in its azure hue.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
blue are the hills that are far away.
divide and conquer  The best way to 
conquer or control a group of people 
is by encouraging them to fi ght among 
themselves rather than allowing them to 
unite in opposition to the ruling authority: 
“This Republican Administration treats us 
as if we were pieces of a puzzle that can’t fi t 
together. They’ve tried to put us into com-
partments and separate us from each other. 
Their political theory is ‘divide and con-
quer’” (transcript of speech by Ann Rich-
ards, New York Times, 1988). Of Latin origin, 
the proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1605. It has been the maxim of many rulers 
and authorities throughout history.
Variant of this proverb: divide and 
rule.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
a house divided against itself cannot 
stand; united we stand, divided we fall.
do as I say, not as I do  Do what some-
body tells or advises you to do rather 
than what that person actually does him-
self or herself: This was a classic case of 
“Do as I say, not as I do”—she had appeared 
on television urging mothers to have their 
babies vaccinated, but subsequently admitted 
that she had refused the vaccine for her own 
child. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
an Anglo-Saxon text dating from before 
the 12th century.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: example is better than precept; a 
good example is the best sermon.
 do as I say, not as I do
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   57 1/29/07   5:12:26 PM
58
do as you would be done by  Treat 
other people in the way that you would 
like to be treated: Do as you would be done 
by—you can’t expect people to be honest 
with you if you persist in lying to them. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
c. 1596. It was used in a letter written by 
Lord Chesterfi eld in 1747,—“‘Do as you 
would be done by,’ is the surest method 
that I know of pleasing”—and was further 
popularized as the name of a good fairy, 
Mrs. Doasyouwouldbedoneby, in Charles 
Kingsley’s The Water Babies (1863).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
do unto others as you would they 
should do unto you.
the doctor is often more to be feared 
than the disease  Some courses of medi-
cal treatment are worse than the disease 
they aim to cure: In years gone by there 
was a deal of truth in the saying “the doctor 
is often more to be feared than the disease.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1621 by 
Robert Burton in his Anatomy of Melancholy.
the dog always returns to his vomit  Peo-
ple always return to the scene of their 
crime or wrongdoing: The police kept a 
24-hour watch on the building where the body 
was found, hoping that as a dog returns to its 
vomit, the murderer would eventually reappear. 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “As a dog 
returneth to his vomit, so a fool returneth 
to his folly” (Proverbs 26:11); “The dog is 
turned to his own vomit again; and the sow 
that was washed to her wallowing in the 
mire” (2 Peter 2:22). It also occurs in Chau-
cer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “the hound 
. . . retourneth to eten his spewying.”
dog does not eat dog  A member of a 
particular group of people will not—or 
should not—take action that will harm 
another member of the same group: 
“Except where I felt it to be absolutely 
essential . . . I have avoided any discus-
sion of criticism and critics: dog should 
not eat dog” (J. B. Priestley, Literature and 
Western Man, 1960). Of Latin origin, the 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1543. It has given rise to the cliché dog eat 
dog, referring to ruthless competition in 
industry, politics, etc.
Variant of this proverb: dog will not 
eat dog.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: hawks will not pick out hawks’ 
eyes; there’s honor among thieves.
a dog is man’s best friend  Dogs are 
more faithful than any human companion: 
“‘A dog is man’s best friend’ is an old 
adage which the defendants have either 
forgotten or decided to ignore” (Tran-
script of judgment in a case involving 
laboratory animals, New York Times, 1993). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in a letter 
written by the English poet Alexander 
Pope in 1709.
Variant of this proverb: man’s best 
friend is his dog.
the dogs bark, but the caravan goes on 
The warnings or protests of those in 
lowly positions are often ignored by those 
in power and are not allowed to stand in 
the way of progress: Disregarding public 
opinion, they went ahead with their plan—the 
dogs bark, but the caravan goes on. Of Asian 
origin, the proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1891 in John Lockwood 
Kipling’s Beast and Man in India.
dogs that bark don’t always bite  See a 
barking dog never bites.
do as you would be done by
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   58 1/29/07   5:12:26 PM
59
a dog that will fetch a bone will carry 
a bone  Beware of people who bring 
you gossip about others, because they are 
equally likely to pass on gossip about you: 
She came rushing over to tell me that Julia had 
left Peter, but I gave her no hint that my own 
marriage was heading the same way. A dog that 
will fetch a bone will carry a bone, and I didn’t 
want the whole town to know. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1830 in R. Forby’s Vocabu-
lary of East Anglia, but with the implication 
that it was already in use.
dog will not eat dog  See dog does not 
eat dog.
don’t air your dirty linen in public  See 
don’t wash your dirty linen in public.
don’t bite off more than you can 
chew  Do not take on a task that is 
larger or more diffi cult than you can 
manage: Don’t bite off more than you can 
chew—this project is far too complex to be 
tackled by a single person.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t go near the water until 
you learn how to swim; don’t start 
anything you can’t finish.
don’t bite the hand that feeds you  Do 
not behave unkindly or ungratefully 
toward those on whom you depend for 
fi nancial or other support: “And having 
looked to government for bread, on the 
very fi rst scarcity they will turn and bite 
the hand that fed them” (Edmund Burke, 
Thoughts and Details on Scarcity, 1797). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1711. 
The producer Sam Goldwyn apparently 
confused this proverb with another when 
he remarked, “That’s the way with these 
directors, they’re always biting the hand 
that lays the golden egg” (Alva Johnston, 
The Great Goldwyn, 1937).
don’t burn your bridges behind 
you  Think carefully before taking any 
step that is irrevocable, because you can-
not be sure what the future holds: You 
might want to return to this town some day, 
so try to leave it on good terms with everybody 
and don’t burn your bridges behind you. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1923 in 
A. Crowley, Confessions. It refers to the 
military practice of burning bridges as 
an army advances, making retreat impos-
sible. The fi gurative phrase to burn one’s 
boats has the same meaning.
Variant of this proverb: don’t burn 
your bridges before you.
don’t carry all your eggs in one basket 
See don’t put all your eggs in one 
basket.
don’t cast your pearls before swine  It is 
pointless to waste fi ne or beautiful things 
on people who are incapable of appreciat-
ing them: Ignoring advice not to cast pearls 
before swine, he signed up some of the greatest 
classical musicians in the country to perform at 
the concert. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, 
neither cast ye your pearls before swine, 
lest they trample them under their feet, and 
turn again and rend you” (Matthew 7:6).
Variant of this proverb: don’t throw 
pearls to swine.
don’t change horses in the middle of 
the stream  See don’t swap horses in 
midstream.
don’t change the rules in the middle 
of the game  It is wrong or unfair 
 don’t change the rules in the middle of the game
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   59 1/29/07   5:12:26 PM
60
to change the rules, terms, or condi-
tions relating to something once it is in 
progress, or after people have become 
involved in it: It is an unwritten law of busi-
ness that you don’t change the rules in the 
middle of the game, which is precisely what our 
customers have done by reducing the tolerances 
on their specifi cations.
don’t count your chickens before they are 
hatched  Do not act on the optimistic 
assumption that you will get or achieve 
something until you actually have it or are 
absolutely certain of success: “The experts, 
you know, the big dealers—we don’t want 
any publicity just yet. . . . And we don’t 
want to count our purely putative chickens 
before they’re hatched” (William Plomer, 
Museum Pieces, 1950). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1570 in the form “Count not 
thy chickens that unhatched be.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: first catch your hare; there’s 
many a slip between cup and lip.
don’t cross the bridge till you come to it 
Do not anticipate trouble or worry about 
future problems that may or may not 
arise: The case may not even come to court, 
so there’s no point in worrying whether or not 
you will have to give evidence—don’t cross 
the bridge till you come to it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1850, in the Ameri-
can poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s 
Journal, and reappeared the following 
year in his poem “The Golden Legend”: 
“Don’t cross the bridge till you come 
to it,/Is a proverb old, and of excellent 
wit.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t meet troubles halfway; suf-
ficient unto the day is the evil thereof; 
take things as they come.
don’t cry before you’re hurt  There is no 
point in upsetting yourself about some-
thing bad that may or may not happen: 
They probably have no intention of dismiss-
ing you, so don’t cry before you’re hurt. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1548, in Reliq. Antiquae, in the form “I cry 
not before I am pricked,” but a similar 
proverb existed in French more than 200 
years earlier.
don’t cry over spilled milk  See it’s no 
use crying over spilled milk.
don’t cut off your nose to spite your 
face  Do not take action to spite others 
that will harm you more than them: “For 
that money and your own infernal vanity 
you are willing to deliberately turn out 
bad work. You’ll do quite enough bad 
work without knowing it. And . . . I am 
not going to let you cut off your nose to 
spite your face for all the gold in England” 
(Rudyard Kipling, The Light That Failed, 
1890). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English c. 1560, in Deceit of Women, in the 
form “He that bites his nose off, shames 
his face,” but similar proverbs existed in 
medieval Latin and 14th-century French.
don’t get into deep water until you learn 
how to swim  See don’t go near the 
water until you learn how to swim.
don’t get mad, get even  Take positive 
action to retaliate for a wrong that has 
been done to you, rather than wasting 
your time and energy in angry recrimi-
nations: “Don’t get mad, get even” was her 
watchword, so when one of the other students 
in the art class laughed at her painting she 
calmly picked up his sculpture and dashed it 
to the ground. The proverb is of compara-
don’t count your chickens before they are hatched
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   60 1/29/07   5:12:26 PM
61
tively recent origin; it was fi rst recorded 
in 1975: “Some of the reasons have their 
roots in that wonderful law of the Boston 
Irish political jungle: ‘Don’t get mad; get 
even’” (Ben Bradlee, Conversations with 
Kennedy).
don’t give up the ship  Never stop 
fi ghting and do not surrender: My wife 
encouraged me to stand up to the bullies at 
work, and when I talked of resigning she 
always said, “Don’t give up the ship.” The 
proverb has been attributed to James 
Lawrence, commander of the U.S. frig-
ate “Chesapeake,” when he was fatally 
wounded in 1813. It fi rst appeared in 
print the following year in The Diary of F. 
Palmer, Privateersman.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never say die.
don’t go near the water until you learn 
how to swim  Do not put yourself in a 
diffi cult or dangerous situation until you 
are capable of handling it: You should not 
have agreed to take part in this mission with 
the little experience that you have. Have you 
never heard the proverb “Don’t go near the 
water until you learn how to swim”? The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1855 in the form 
“Never venture out of your depth till you 
can swim.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t get 
into deep water until you learn how to 
swim.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t bite off more than you can 
chew; don’t start anything you can’t 
finish.
don’t halloo till you are out of the 
woods  See don’t shout until you 
are out of the woods.
don’t hide your light under a bushel  If 
you have special skills or talents, do not 
conceal them through modesty and pre-
vent others from appreciating or benefi t-
ing from them: “It ain’t that I am vain, 
but that you don’t like to put your own 
light under a bushel. What’s the worth 
of your reputation, if you can’t convey 
the reason for it to the person you most 
wish to value it?” (Charles Dickens, Doctor 
Marigold, 1865). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “Neither do men light a candle, 
and put it under a bushel, but on a candle-
stick; and it giveth light unto all that are in 
the house” (Matthew 5:15).
don’t hit a man when he’s down  It 
is unkind and unsportsmanlike to cause 
further physical or mental harm to some-
body who is already suffering: “. . . while 
it did Tom’s heart good to see the cordial 
respect paid to his father, it tried his 
patience . . . to hear . . . ‘That’s the son; 
it’s hard on him. Wild fellow, do him 
good.’ ‘Granted; but you needn’t hit a 
man when he’s down,’ muttered Tom to 
himself, feeling every moment a stron-
ger desire to do something that should 
silence everybody” (Louisa May Alcott, 
An Old-Fashioned Girl, 1870). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1551 in the writ-
ings of the English archbishop Thomas 
Cranmer.
don’t judge a book by its cover  Do 
not form an opinion about something 
or somebody based solely on outward 
appearance: “Appreciate your allowing 
me to participate, but you should be 
less trusting, Ellie—can’t always judge 
a book by its cover” (Dorothy Cannell, 
Thin Woman, 1984). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1929 in the form “You can’t 
 don’t judge a book by its cover
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   61 1/29/07   5:12:26 PM
62
judge a book by its binding” in the peri-
odical American Speech.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t tell 
a book by its cover.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
the cowl does not make the monk; 
judge not according to appearances; 
there’s many a good cock come out 
of a tattered bag.
don’t judge a man until you have walked 
a mile in his boots  Do not criticize or 
pass judgment on somebody until you 
have been in the same situation, under-
gone the same experiences, or tried to do 
the same thing: I was sure that I would never 
have made such a fundamental mistake if I had 
been in his position, but I made no comment, 
remembering the old adage “Don’t judge a man 
until you have walked a mile in his boots.”
don’t jump from the frying pan into the 
fi re  Do not go from a bad situation to a 
worse one: “If it is decided that the reli-
gious fundamentalism of Iran is a danger 
to all the nations of the Middle East . . . 
then Israelis will have to ask themselves: 
Are we jumping from the frying pan into 
the fi re?” (New York Times, 1989). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in English in 1528, 
in the works of the English statesman Sir 
Thomas More, but it is of ancient origin. 
It is perhaps more frequently used in the 
form of the fi gurative phrase out of the fry-
ing pan into the fi re.
Variant of this proverb: don’t jump 
out of the frying pan into the fi re.
don’t kill the goose that lays the golden 
eggs  Take care not to destroy some-
thing valuable, such as a source of steady 
income, through greed, impatience, or a 
desire for instant gain: “All these turns 
which he was making through the streets 
seemed to indicate that he was not a 
simple and honest man. To arrest him too 
hastily would be ‘to kill the hen that laid 
the golden eggs.’ Where was the incon-
venience in waiting? Javert was very sure 
that he would not escape” (Victor Hugo, 
Les Misérables, 1862). The proverb comes 
from one of the fables of Aesop (sixth 
century b.c.), in which a farmer has a 
goose that lays golden eggs. Instead of 
being content with receiving one golden 
egg every day for the foreseeable future, 
he kills the goose in the hope of gaining 
instant access to all the gold inside. Need-
less to say, he fi nds nothing.
Variant of this proverb: don’t kill the 
goose that laid the golden egg.
don’t let the fox guard the henhouse 
Do not put somebody in a position where 
he or she will be tempted to wrongdoing: 
There was widespread outrage when it was 
discovered that a known pedophile had been 
given a job at the school. “You don’t let the fox 
guard the henhouse,” said one of the protesters. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in Contre-
League in 1589.
Variant of this proverb: don’t set a 
wolf to watch the sheep.
don’t make the same mistake twice  You 
should learn from your mistakes rather 
than repeating them: You can’t expect to get 
everything right fi rst time, but try to put past 
experience to good use and don’t make the same 
mistake twice.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
experience is the best teacher.
don’t marry for money, but don’t marry 
without money  See never marry for 
money, but marry where money is.
don’t judge a man until you have walked a mile in his boots
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   62 1/29/07   5:12:27 PM
63
don’t meet troubles halfway   Do not 
worry about problems before they actu-
ally happen: “Do not meet troubles half-
way. . . . When need arises we will see 
what can be done” (Michael Sadleir, Fanny 
by Gaslight, 1940). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1896, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of ancient origin. 
Compare Seneca (c. 4 b.c.–a.d. 65), “quid 
iuvat dolori sui occurrere? [what help is it to 
run out to meet your troubles?].”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t cross the bridge till you 
come to it; never trouble trouble 
till trouble troubles you; take things 
as they come.
don’t overload gratitude; if you do, she’ll 
kick  When people are grateful to you, 
do not take excessive advantage of the 
situation, because any sense of obliga-
tion has its limits: You seem to think that 
just because you once did me a great favor, I 
should be forever in your debt—haven’t you 
heard the proverb “Don’t overload gratitude; 
if you do, she’ll kick”? The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1741, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
don’t play with edged tools  See it’s ill 
jesting with edged tools.
don’t play with fi re  See if you play 
with fire, you get burned.
don’t put all your eggs in one bas-
ket  Spread your risks or investments 
so that if one enterprise fails you will not 
lose everything: When my aunt died, she left 
us some money, which we invested in a wide 
range of companies, not wanting to put all our 
eggs into one basket. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in the 17th century 
in Giovanni Torriano’s A Common Place of 
Italian Proverbs and Proverbial Phrases, and 
it is probably of Spanish or Italian origin. 
The earlier English proverb “Venture not 
all in one bottom [ship],” of Latin ori-
gin, expresses the same sentiment. Mark 
Twain, in Pudd’nhead Wilson (1894), gives 
a piece of alternative advice: “Put all your 
eggs in the one basket, and—watch that 
basket.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t carry 
all your eggs in one basket.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the mouse that has but one hole is 
quickly taken.
don’t put new wine in old bottles  See 
you can’t put new wine in old bot-
tles.
don’t put the cart before the horse  It 
is important to do things in the right or 
natural order; also used when people 
confuse cause and effect: Don’t put the 
cart before the horse—it’s pointless to start 
advertising for staff until you have raised the 
money to set up the business. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form c. 1520, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
first things first.
don’t rock the boat  It is often wise to 
avoid taking action or making suggestions 
that will cause upset or trouble: There are 
some who will always speak out when they 
think things should be changed, and there are 
others who remain silent, preferring not to 
rock the boat. The proverb dates from the 
1920s and was popularized by the song 
“Sit Down, You’re Rocking the Boat” in 
the musical Guys and Dolls (1950).
 don’t rock the boat
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   63 1/29/07   5:12:27 PM
64
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let sleeping dogs lie.
don’t rush the cattle  See hurry no 
man’s cattle.
don’t set a wolf to watch the sheep  See 
don’t let the fox guard the hen-
house.
don’t shoot the messenger  When you 
receive bad news, do not vent your anger 
or distress on the person who brings it: 
Enraged by a report from one of his fi nancial 
advisers, the president called for the man’s dis-
missal. He was warned against such a drastic 
step by somebody who reminded him, “The man 
only wrote the report—don’t shoot the mes-
senger.” The sentiment expressed by this 
proverb is of ancient origin: Sophocles 
wrote c. 442 b.c., “Nobody likes the man 
who brings bad news.” Its current form, 
however, is relatively recent.
don’t shoot the pianist, he’s doing his 
best  Don’t criticize somebody who is 
not to blame, or who is doing the best 
he or she can in diffi cult circumstances: 
I heard that the new temporary lecturer could 
barely control the rowdy students—but on 
the basis of “Don’t shoot the pianist, he’s 
doing his best” I decided that the best policy 
was to remain silent. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1883, in Oscar Wilde’s Per-
sonal Impressions of America, “Over the piano 
was printed a notice: Please do not shoot 
the pianist. He is doing his best” referring 
to a saloon in Leadville, Colorado.
don’t shout until you are out of the 
woods  Avoid any show of triumph or 
relief until you are sure that a period of 
diffi culty or danger is over: “Don’t holla 
till you are out of the wood. This is a night 
for praying rather than boasting” (Charles 
Kingsley, Hereward the Wake, 1866). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1770. It 
has given rise to the fi gurative phrase out 
of the woods, meaning “out of danger or 
trouble.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t halloo 
till you are out of the woods.
don’t shut the barn door after the horse 
is stolen  It is too late to take action to 
prevent an undesirable event after it has 
already occurred: “‘The union has to act 
now if it is to affect events,’ said Harley 
Shaiken, a former auto worker . . . ‘If they 
wait until the national contract expires 
in September 1993, it will be like clos-
ing the barn door after the horse has 
gotten out’” (New York Times, 1994). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1350 in 
Douce MS.
Variant of this proverb: it’s too late 
to shut the stable door after the horse 
has bolted.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s easy to be wise after the event.
don’t spoil the ship for half a penny’s 
worth of tar  Do not make petty econo-
mies that will adversely affect the fi nal 
result of something, especially if you 
have already spent a lot of money on it 
or put a lot of effort into it: “Mrs. Owen 
. . . had recommended a doctor, and 
Mildred saw him once a week. He was 
to charge fi fteen guineas. ‘Of course I 
could have got it done cheaper, but Mrs. 
Owen strongly recommended him, and 
I thought it wasn’t worth while to spoil 
the ship for a coat of tar’” (W. Somerset 
Maugham, Of Human Bondage, 1915). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1623 in the 
don’t rush the cattle
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   64 1/29/07   5:12:27 PM
65
form “A man will not lose a hog, for a 
halfpennyworth of tar.” (Tar was used to 
treat sores and wounds on farm animals.) 
The word hog was subsequently replaced 
by sheep, and through a misunderstand-
ing of rural pronunciation it ultimately 
became ship.
Variant of this proverb: don’t spoil 
the ship for a ha’porth of tar.
don’t start anything you can’t fi nish 
Do not begin something unless you are 
sure that you have suffi cient strength, 
courage, etc. to see it through to the end: 
Ignoring the advice “Don’t start anything you 
can’t fi nish,” he embarked on a costly lawsuit 
against his former employers. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1477 in Dictes and 
Sayenges of Philosophirs.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t bite off more than you can 
chew; don’t go near the water until 
you learn how to swim.
don’t swallow the cow and worry with 
the tail  See it’s idle to swallow the 
cow and choke on the tail.
don’t swap horses in midstream  Once 
you have embarked on a course of action 
or an undertaking, it is better not to 
change your tactics or methods along the 
way: “‘If ours is the true religion why do 
you not become a Catholic?’ . . . ‘Reverend 
father, we have a proverb in England never 
to swap horses while crossing a stream’” 
(Robert Graves, Goodbye to All That, 1929). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1864, 
in the works of Abraham Lincoln: “I am 
reminded . . . of a story of an old Dutch 
farmer, who remarked to a companion 
once that ‘it was best not to swap horses 
when crossing streams.’”
Variant of this proverb: don’t change 
horses in the middle of the stream.
don’t take down a fence unless you are 
sure why it was put up  Most things 
were constructed or established for a 
purpose, and it is unwise to destroy or 
dismantle them unless you are certain 
that they are not longer required: The law 
seemed outdated, but the legislators were reluc-
tant to repeal it, on the basis that you shouldn’t 
take down a fence unless you are sure why it 
was put up.
Variant of this proverb: don’t tear 
down a wall unless you are sure why it 
was put up.
don’t talk the talk if you can’t walk the 
walk  Don’t boast of something if you 
are unwilling or unable to back it up by 
your actions: It’s all very well to say you 
can climb that tree, but don’t talk the talk if 
you can’t walk the walk. The proverb fi rst 
became familiar in the USA toward the 
end of the 20th century. A more concise 
variant is “walk the talk.”
don’t teach your grandmother to suck 
eggs  Do not presume to give advice 
or instruction to those who are older 
and more experienced than you: “Why, 
if you knew how many tens of thousands 
of women, especially in New York, say 
just what you do, you’d lose all the fun 
of thinking you’re a lone genius. . . . 
There’s always about a million young 
women just out of college who want 
to teach their grandmothers how to 
suck eggs” (Sinclair Lewis, Main Street, 
1920). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1707.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
they that live longest see most.
 don’t teach your grandmother to suck eggs
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   65 1/29/07   5:12:27 PM
66
don’t tear down a wall unless you are 
sure why it was put up  See don’t take 
down a fence unless you are sure 
why it was put up.
don’t throw away your dirty water until 
you get clean  It is advisable to keep 
what you have, however unacceptable it 
has become, until you are sure that you 
can replace it with something better: 
“I’m keeping him on for the present. . . . 
It’s no good throwing away dirty water 
until one’s got clean” (Victor Bridges, 
Greensea Island, 1922). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, c. 
1475. Its current form occurs in a prov-
erb collection of 1710.
don’t throw good money after bad  If 
you have already spent money on a venture 
that seems likely to fail, do not waste any 
further money on it. The repairs to the boat 
cost me a fortune, and it’s still not seaworthy, 
so I’ve decided not to throw good money after 
bad—I’m going to save up for a new boat 
instead. The proverb was fi rst recorded in J. 
Stevens’s A New Spanish and English Diction-
ary, 1706.
don’t throw out the baby with the bath-
water  Do not take the drastic step of 
abolishing or discarding something in its 
entirety when only part of it is unaccept-
able: Let’s not throw the baby out with the 
bathwater—the law as it stands is basically 
sound, and just needs a few amendments to 
close up the loopholes. First recorded in 
English in 1853 in Thomas Carlyle, Nigger 
Question, the proverb is of German origin, 
dating from the 16th century or earlier.
don’t throw pearls to swine  See don’t 
cast your pearls before swine.
don’t wash your dirty linen in public  Do 
not discuss private disputes or family 
scandals in public: The chat-show format in 
which ordinary people air their personal griev-
ances against friends and family in front of a 
nationwide audience was obviously dreamed 
up by somebody unacquainted with the saying 
“Don’t wash your dirty linen in public.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1809 in 
T. G. Fessenden’s Pills.
Variant of this proverb: don’t air 
your dirty linen in public.
don’t wish too hard; you might just get 
what you wished for  Beware of wish-
ing for something too much, because 
you might not like it when you get it: 
Don’t wish too hard; you might just get what 
you wished for. Many who strive for fame and 
fortune—and achieve it—long to return to 
their former lives of humble obscurity. The 
sentiment expressed by this proverb is of 
ancient origin. Its variant form is associ-
ated with Oscar Wilde, and is the moral of 
his novel The Picture of Dorian Gray (1891).
Variant of this proverb: be careful 
what you wish for: you might get it.
a door must be either shut or open  You 
must choose between two alternatives, 
one of which excludes the other: You 
must decide whether you are going to accept 
or refuse their offer—there is no middle way. 
A door must be either shut or open. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1762, in Oliver 
Goldsmith’s The Citizen of the World.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t have it both ways.
do right and fear no man  Take courage 
from a clear conscience: Her motto was “Do 
right and fear no man,” so she had no qualms 
about exposing the corrupt practices of the 
don’t tear down a wall unless you are sure why it was put up
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   66 1/29/07   5:12:27 PM
67
organization, and facing the inevitable repercus-
sions. The proverb was fi rst recorded in c. 
1450. In modern use it sometimes has a 
punning extension, “don’t write and fear 
no woman.”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
a clear conscience can bear any trou-
ble; evil doers are evil dreaders.
a dose of adversity is often as needful 
as a dose of medicine  Hardship and 
misfortune may be unpleasant, but they 
can sometimes have a benefi cial effect on 
the character, especially when people fail 
to appreciate the good things they have: 
Life has always been easy for him, and this spell 
of ill luck has hit him hard. But it may be all 
for the best—they say that a dose of adversity 
is often as needful as a dose of medicine. The 
proverb is recorded as a regional expres-
sion in the United States.
do unto others as you would have them 
do unto you  Treat other people as 
you would wish them to treat you: “He 
turned the other cheek on every occa-
sion and always did unto others exactly 
as he would have had others do unto 
him” (Joseph Heller, Catch-22, 1961). The 
proverb is of biblical origin: “Therefore 
all things whatsoever ye would that men 
should do to you, do ye even so to them” 
(Matthew 7:12), “And as ye would that 
men should do to you, do ye also to them 
likewise” (Luke 6:31), and is known as the 
Golden Rule. Charles Dickens produced a 
cynical parody of the proverb, “Do other 
men, for they would do you,” in Martin 
Chuzzlewit (1843), and George Bernard 
Shaw wrote in Man and Superman (1903), 
“Do not do unto others as you would that 
they should do unto you. Their tastes may 
not be the same.”
Variant of this proverb: do unto 
others as you would they should do unto 
you.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
do as you would be done by.
do well and have well  See never do 
things by halves.
dream of a funeral and you hear of a 
marriage  According to popular super-
stition, if you dream about a funeral you 
will shortly receive news that somebody 
of your acquaintance is to be married: 
Last night I dreamed I was at the funeral of 
some famous person I’d never heard of, so I’m 
expecting a wedding invitation in the mail 
today—dream of a funeral and you hear of a 
marriage. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in J. Clarke’s Parœmiologia Anglo-Latina, 
1639 in the opposite form, “After a 
dream of weddings comes a corpse.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
dreams go by contraries.
dreams go by contraries  What happens 
in your dreams is usually the opposite of 
what is going to happen in reality: Don’t 
upset yourself—everybody has nightmares 
sometimes, and they never come true. Haven’t 
you heard the saying “Dreams go by contraries”? 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in c. 1400 
in Tale of Beryn.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: dream of a funeral and you hear of a 
marriage.
dreams retain the infi rmities of our 
character  Our weaknesses are often 
revealed—usually in symbolic disguise—
in our dreams: If it’s true that dreams retain 
the infi rmities of our character, then I hate 
to think what some of my dreams say about 
dreams retain the infi rmities of our character
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   67 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
68
me! The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Emerson’s Demonology, 1877.
a dripping June sets all in tune  A rainy 
June means there will be a good harvest 
of crops and fl owers later in the summer: 
The thought that a dripping June sets all in 
tune was of little comfort as we sheltered from 
the downpour under a tarpaulin. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1742 in the Agreeable 
Companion.
Variant of this proverb: a dry May 
and a dripping June bringeth all things 
into tune.
drive gently over the stones  Take a cau-
tious and delicate approach to any problems 
or diffi culties you encounter in life: Newly-
weds should not expect their happy, carefree state 
to last forever, but if they learn to drive gently 
over the stones, they can look forward to a long 
and successful marriage. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1711, in Jonathan Swift’s Jour-
nal to Stella: “A gallop: sit fast, sirrah, and 
don’t ride hard upon the stones.”
drive nature out of the door and it will 
return by the window  See you can 
drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back.
drought never bred dearth in England 
Because of its notoriously damp climate, 
England has never suffered famine as a 
result of lack of rainfall: Complain as much 
as you like about the weather, but drought 
never bred dearth in England. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1533 by John Hey-
wood in Play of Weather.
a drowning man will catch at a straw 
Desperate people will seize any oppor-
tunity to save themselves, however small: 
“His gratitude caught at those words, as 
the drowning man is said to catch at the 
proverbial straw.” (Wilkie Collins, My 
Lady’s Money, 1877). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1534 in Sir Thomas More’s 
Dialogue of Comfort in the form “Lyke a 
man that in peril of drowning catcheth 
whatsoever cometh next to hand . . . be it 
never so simple a sticke.”
Variant of this proverb: a drowning 
man will clutch at a straw.
drunkenness reveals what soberness 
conceals  People who have had too 
much to drink tend to reveal things they 
would otherwise keep to themselves: “It 
is an old proverbe, whatsoever is in the 
heart of the sober man, is in the mouth 
of the drunkarde” (John Lyly, Euphues: The 
Anatomy of Wit, 1578). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English c. 1387 by Geof-
frey Chaucer in The Canterbury Tales but 
was also quoted much earlier by Horace.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: alcohol will preserve anything 
but a secret; there’s truth in wine.
a dry cough is the trumpeter of death 
A dry cough often heralds death in the 
chronically ill: I don’t want to alarm you, 
but some will tell you that a dry cough is the 
trumpeter of death. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1670 by John Ray in A Collec-
tion of English Proverbs.
a dry May and a dripping June bringeth 
all things in tune  See a dripping june 
sets all in tune.
a dwarf on a giant’s shoulders sees 
further of the two  Those who build on 
the breakthroughs of their predecessors 
surpass their achievements: Modern scien-
a dripping June sets all in tune
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   68 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
69
tists are not necessarily more brilliant than 
those who have gone before, but by standing 
on giants’ shoulders they see further than their 
predecessors could. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1621 by Robert Burton in his 
Anatomy of Melancholy.
Variant of this proverb: a child on a 
giant’s shoulders sees further of the two.
ååååå a dwarf on a giant’s shoulders sees further of the two