70
eagles don’t catch fl ies  People of high 
rank are considered—or consider them-
selves—too important to deal with trivial 
things or lowly folk: “‘Eagles don’t catch 
fl ies.’ ‘What do you mean?’ ‘Inspectors of 
Police don’t trail urchins’ (H. C. Bailey, 
Nobody’s Vineyard, 1942). First recorded in 
English in 1563, the proverb is of Latin 
origin: “Aquila non captat muscas [The eagle 
does not catch fl ies].”
the early bird catches the worm  Those 
who are late to act, arrive, or get up 
tend to miss opportunities already seized 
by those who came earlier: To be sure of 
getting the best-quality produce, you need 
to be among the fi rst to arrive at the mar-
ket—remember that the early bird catches 
the worm. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in William Camden, Remaines Concerning 
Britaine, 1636. It features in a joke about 
a father who tries to get his son out of bed 
in the morning by reminding him, “The 
early bird catches the worm.” “Being early 
didn’t do the worm much good, did it?” 
replies the boy.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
first come, first served.
the early man never borrows from the 
late man  Farmers who sow their crops 
in good time have a plentiful harvest and 
do not need to borrow food or money 
from others; also used in other walks of 
life: The old agricultural saying “The early 
man never borrows from the late man” could be 
applied to pensions—the sooner you start sav-
ing for your retirement, the more you will have 
to live on. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1659.
early ripe, early rotten  See soon ripe, 
soon rotten.
early to bed and early to rise, makes 
a man healthy, wealthy, and wise  A 
lifestyle that involves neither staying up 
late nor sleeping late is good for body 
and mind and leads to fi nancial success: 
“‘Early to bed and early to rise.’ Makes a 
man healthy, wealthy, and wise, McGuffi n 
replied to himself. But in Ben Volper’s 
case it was perhaps two out of three at 
best” (Robert Upton, Fade Out, 1984). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, in 1496: “As the olde englysshe 
prouerbe sayth in this wyse. Who soo woll 
ryse erly shall be holy helthy and zely” 
(Treatise of Fishing with Angle). The current 
form dates from 1639. The U.S. humorist 
James Thurber parodied the proverb in 
“The Shrike and the Chipmunks” (1939): 
“Early to rise and early to bed makes a 
male healthy and wealthy and dead.”
e
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   70 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
71
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one hour’s sleep before midnight is 
worth two after.
easier said than done  It is usually far 
easier to advise, suggest, or talk about 
doing something than actually to do it: 
“‘Why don’t some one kill him?’ was Joe’s 
sharp question. ‘Easier said than done, lad’” 
(Zane Grey, Spirit of the Border, 1905). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1483 in the 
form “It is easier to say than to do.”
Variant of this proverb: sooner said 
than done.
east, west, home’s best  No matter how 
far you travel, you will never fi nd a place 
that is better than your own home; usu-
ally said by a returning traveler: “‘You’re 
soon returned, my dear,’ said Agathya 
Mikhailovna. ‘I grew homesick, Agathya 
Mikhailovna. East or West, home is best,’ 
he answered, and went into his study” 
(Leo Tolstoy, Anna Karenina, 1873–77). 
Of German origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1859.
Variant of this proverb: travel east 
and travel west, a man’s own home is still 
the best.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: home is home, be it ever so homely; 
there’s no place like home.
East is East and West is West and never 
the twain shall meet  People who are 
very different in background or outlook 
are likely never to agree: Please try to keep off 
politics at the dinner party tonight—you know 
that you will never bring Matt around to your 
way of thinking. East is East and West is West 
and never the twain shall meet! The proverb 
comes from Rudyard Kipling’s poem “The 
Ballad of East and West” (1889).
easy come, easy go  Things that are eas-
ily acquired, especially money, are just as 
easily lost or spent: “I doubt the ability 
of any of them to keep money more than 
fi ve years at the rate they’re spending. 
Easy come, easy go” (Margaret Mitchell, 
Gone with the Wind, 1936). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1832, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of much 
earlier origin, occurring in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “And lightly as 
it comth, so wol we spende.”
Variant of this proverb: light come, 
light go.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
quickly come, quickly go.
easy does it  A cautious or gentle 
approach, such as to a diffi cult task or an 
awkward person, is often best: Easy does 
it. It’s best to be very careful when dealing with 
your Uncle Jack—he’s old and ill and doesn’t 
take kindly to being disturbed. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1863 in T. Taylor’s 
Ticket-of-Leave Man.
Variant of this proverb: gently does it.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
softly, softly, catchee monkey.
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we 
die  Live life to the full every day, because 
death could strike at any time: The latest 
government health campaign warns that those 
who live their lives too literally according to the 
proverb “Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow 
we die” may actually be hastening their own 
deaths by overindulgence. The proverb is of 
biblical origin—it occurs in four passages 
in the Old and New Testaments, none of 
which exactly mirrors its current form: “a 
man hath no better thing under the sun, 
than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry” 
(Ecclesiastes 8:15); “let us eat and drink; 
 eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   71 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
72
for to morrow we shall die” (Isaiah 22:13); 
“eat, drink, and be merry” (Luke 12:19); 
“let us eat and drink; for to morrow we 
die” (1 Corinthians 15:32).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: gather ye rosebuds while ye may; 
live every day as though it were your 
last; seize the day.
eat to live, do not live to eat  The main 
purpose of eating is to stay fi t and healthy—
it should not be regarded solely as a source 
of pleasure, which inevitably leads to exces-
sive consumption of the wrong types of 
food: As children we hated taking tea with our 
grandmother, whose motto was “Eat to live, do 
not live to eat” and whose table was accordingly 
bare of cookies, pastries, and all the other things 
that would have made these visits bearable. The 
proverb is attributed to the ancient Greek 
philosopher Socrates (469–399 b.c.). An 
article in the New York Times (1982) made 
the telling observation, “Until recently the 
world was divided into those who eat to 
live and those who live to eat.”
eavesdroppers hear no good of them-
selves  See listeners never hear any 
good of themselves.
education doesn’t come by bumping your 
head against the schoolhouse  Educa-
tion can only be acquired by studying, and 
by listening and talking to teachers: Chil-
dren must learn to read with understanding, 
and to ask questions in class when they do not 
understand. Education doesn’t come by bumping 
your head against the schoolhouse. The prov-
erb is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
an elephant never forgets  Some people 
have an extraordinary ability to remember 
things, especially wrongs done to them; 
used by or of such a person: You may live to 
regret insulting my brother—an elephant never 
forgets. It has been suggested that this is a 
variant of an ancient Greek proverb, “The 
camel never forgets an injury,” but other 
authorities interpret it more favorably as 
a tribute to the elephant’s apparent intel-
ligence and ability to remember acts of 
kindness. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English in W. Martyn, Blue Ridge (1937).
an empty bag cannot stand  See an 
empty sack cannot stand upright.
an empty barrel makes the most 
noise  See empty vessels make the most 
sound.
an empty sack cannot stand upright 
People who are poor or hungry cannot 
survive, work effectively, or remain honest: 
You’d better have a good breakfast before you set 
off—an empty sack cannot stand upright. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1642 in a 
collection of Italian proverbs, with the note 
“Applied to such as either pinch themselves, 
or are pincht by hard fortune.”
Variant of this proverb: an empty bag 
cannot stand.
empty vessels make the most 
sound  Foolish people are the most talk-
ative; often used as a put-down to some-
body who chatters incessantly: Don’t be 
deceived by his glib patter—remember that 
empty vessels make the most sound. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded before 1430. It 
occurs in Shakespeare’s Henry V (4:4), “I 
did never know so full a voice issue 
from so empty a heart: but the saying is 
true—The empty vessel makes the great-
est sound.” In Ulysses (1922), James Joyce 
eat to live, do not live to eat
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   72 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
73
toys with the literal meaning of the prov-
erb: “Chamber music. Could make a kind 
of pun on that. . . . Tinkling. Empty vessels 
make most noise. Because the acoustics, 
the resonance changes according as the 
weight of the water is equal to the law of 
falling water.”
Variant of this proverb: an empty 
barrel makes the most noise.
the end crowns the work  The outcome 
or conclusion of an enterprise is the basis 
on which it is judged: “‘But proof, sir, 
proof must be built up stone by stone,’ 
said the Mayor. ‘As I say, the end crowns 
the work’” (Charles Dickens, The Mystery 
of Edwin Drood, 1870). Of Latin origin, 
the proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in the 16th century. It occurs in Shake-
speare’s play Troilus and Cressida (4:5) “The 
end crowns all,/And that old common 
arbitrator, Time,/Will one day end it.”
Variant of this proverb: the end 
crowns all.
the end justifi es the means  Any course 
of action, however immoral or unscrupu-
lous, is justifi able if it achieves a worthy 
objective: “It was a fundamental principle 
of the order that the end justifi es the 
means. By this code, lying, theft, perjury, 
assassination, were not only pardonable 
but commendable, when they served the 
interests of the church” (Ellen G. White, 
The Great Controversy between Christ and 
Satan, 1888). The proverb has been traced 
back to the works of the Roman poet 
Ovid (43 b.c.–a.d. 18): “exitus acta probat 
[the outcome justifi es the deeds].” It was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1583.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: never do evil that good may come 
of it.
the enemy of my enemy is my 
friend  Those who dislike or oppose the 
same person or thing are bound to be 
friends or allies: “While the government 
of Iran had no great sympathy for Com-
munism, they apparently believed that the 
Sandinistas qualifi ed for that old Middle 
Eastern proverb: the enemy of my enemy 
is my friend” (Oliver L. North, Under Fire, 
1991). The proverb is of ancient Arab 
origin.
the English are a nation of shopkeepers 
It is in the national character of the English 
to be preoccupied with commercial, mid-
dle-class concerns: “Americans . . . are a 
nation of salesmen just as the English are a 
nation of small shopkeepers” (Ruth Ren-
dell, Put on by Cunning, 1981). The proverb 
began as a quotation from Adam Smith’s 
The Wealth of Nations, published in 1776, 
but is usually associated with Napoleon.
an Englishman’s home is his castle  See 
a man’s home is his castle.
enough is as good as a feast  A mod-
erate amount is suffi cient; often said by 
somebody who does not want any more: 
“‘Fighting? . . . what have you seen but a 
skirmish or two?—Ah! if you saw war on 
the grand scale—sixty or a hundred thou-
sand men in the fi eld on each side!’ ‘I am 
not at all curious, Colonel.—“Enough,” 
says our homely proverb, “is as good as a 
feast’ ” (Sir Walter Scott, Waverly, 1814). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form c. 1470 in Sir Thomas Malory’s Le 
Morte d’Arthur. In The Picture of Dorian Gray 
(1891), Oscar Wilde presented the oppo-
site view: “Moderation is a fatal thing. 
Enough is as bad as a meal. More than 
enough is as good as a feast.”
 enough is as good as a feast
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   73 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
74
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
enough is enough; moderation in all 
things; there’s measure in all things.
enough is enough  Enough of something 
is suffi cient: I could have stayed all night but 
enough is enough. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546 by John Heywood in 
A Dialogue containing . . . the Proverbs in 
the English Tongue, but it is ultimately of 
Roman origin and is common to several 
European languages. Today it is usually 
employed when calling for an end to 
something irritating or something threat-
ening to get out of control.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
enough is as good as a feast.
envy never dies  Envy does not fade 
with passing time: “Hatred hath an end, 
envy never ceaseth” (Robert Burton, 
Anatomy of Melancholy, 1624). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1523–25 by John 
Berners in Froissart but is of older, possibly 
Roman, origin.
equality begins in the grave  Only in 
death are all people truly equal: Don’t talk 
to me about equality—discrimination and 
injustice are rife in modern society, and equal-
ity begins in the grave.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
death is the great leveler.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: all men are created equal.
even a blind pig occasionally picks up 
an acorn  An incompetent person or an 
unsystematic approach is bound to suc-
ceed every now and then by chance: I was 
the worst basketball player in the school, so I 
was almost as surprised as everybody else when 
my shot went through the hoop. I guess it’s 
true that even a blind pig occasionally picks 
up an acorn.
even a worm will turn  Even the most 
humble or submissive person will ulti-
mately respond in anger to excessive 
harassment or exploitation: “If he intended 
to be sullen with her to the end, and to 
show his contempt for her, she would 
turn against him. ‘The worm will turn,’ 
she said to herself. And yet she did not 
think herself a worm” (Anthony Trollope, 
The Eustace Diamonds, 1873). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1546 in the form 
“Tread a worm on the tail, and it must 
turn again.” It occurs in Shakespeare’s play 
Henry VI, Part 3 (2:2), “The smallest worm 
will turn being trodden on.”
Variant of this proverb: the worm 
will turn.
even Homer sometimes nods  See 
homer sometimes nods.
even the best of friends must part  See 
the best of friends must part.
everybody has his fi fteen minutes of 
fame  Most people will fi nd themselves 
briefl y in the public eye at least once in 
their lives: Everybody has his fi fteen minutes 
of fame, and my turn came when I found myself 
hailed as a hero for diving into the lake to rescue 
the drowning child. The proverb is associated 
with the U.S. artist Andy Warhol, who 
prophetically remarked in the 1960s, “In 
the future everyone will be famous for 
fi fteen minutes.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every dog has his day.
everybody loves a lord  Members of the 
aristocracy, and other wealthy or infl uen-
enough is enough
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   74 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
75
tial people, are never short of admirers 
or fl atterers among the general public: 
“All the human race loves a lord—that is, 
loves to look upon or be noticed by the 
possessor of Power or Conspicuousness” 
(Mark Twain, The $30,000 Bequest, 1906). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1869 by 
F. J. Furnivall in Queen Elizabeth’s Academy.
everybody’s business is nobody’s busi-
ness  Matters that are of general con-
cern, but are the responsibility of nobody 
in particular, tend to get neglected because 
everybody thinks that somebody else 
should deal with them: It was a classic case of 
“Everybody’s business is nobody’s business”—the 
document had been passed from one department 
to another, but no action had been taken. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1611, but 
the sentiment it expresses occurs in the 
writings of Aristotle: “A matter common 
to most men receives least attention.”
everybody speaks well of the bridge that 
carries him over  See praise the bridge 
that carries you over.
everybody’s queer but you and me, and 
even you are a little queer  There are 
times when it seems that you are the only 
normal or sane person in the world: I’m 
amazed that such a crazy proposal should have 
such widespread public support—it just goes to 
prove the old saying, “Everybody’s queer but you 
and me, and even you are a little queer.” The 
proverb has been attributed to the social 
reformer Robert Owen (1771–1858).
everybody stretches his legs according 
to the length of his coverlet  People 
must adapt themselves to their circum-
stances and live within their means: We 
had to make some drastic changes to our 
lifestyle when my husband lost his job, but we 
coped—everybody stretches his legs according 
to the length of his coverlet. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1550 in W. 
Harrys’s Market or Fair of Usurers.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: cut your coat according to your 
cloth; stretch your arm no further 
than your sleeve will reach.
everybody talks about the weather, but 
nobody does anything about it  People 
are always ready to complain about a 
problem but never willing to solve it: 
Successive administrations have expressed their 
concern about the rise in juvenile crime, but 
no positive steps have been taken to curtail 
it—everybody talks about the weather, but 
nobody does anything about it. The proverb 
is attributed to Mark Twain or his friend 
Charles Dudley Warner.
everybody to whom much is given, of 
him will much be required  More is 
expected of those who have received 
more—that is, those who have had good 
fortune, are naturally gifted, or have been 
shown special favor: “‘Throughout my 
professional career, I have been privileged 
to assist people with their vocational aspi-
rations. I have done so for two reasons. 
First, I stand on the shoulders of many 
individuals who have helped me. Second, 
I believe “to whom much is given much is 
required” so I have tried to lend a helping 
hand’” (Vernon Jordan’s statement quoted 
in Bill Clinton’s response to the Starr 
Report, 1998). The proverb is of bibli-
cal origin: “For unto whomsoever much 
is given, of him shall be much required: 
and to whom men have committed much, 
of him they will ask the more” (Luke 
12:48).
 everybody to whom much is given, of him will much be required
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   75 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
76
every bullet has its billet  In a life-
threatening situation, destiny decides who 
will die and who will survive: “‘Why 
run risks, Captain? You should dismount,’ 
he said. ‘Oh, every bullet has its billet,’ 
answered Vaska Denisov, turning in his sad-
dle” (Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, 1863–69). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1575 in 
George Gascoigne’s Fruits of War: “every 
bullet hath a lighting place.” Its current 
form has been attributed to King William 
III (1650–1702). The military superstition 
that every bullet has somebody’s name on 
it is a modern variant of this proverb.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you’re born to be hanged, then 
you’ll never be drowned.
every cloud has a silver lining  Even 
the most unpleasant experience or 
depressing situation may have a consoling 
aspect or hopeful prospect; used to raise 
somebody’s spirits, or said by those who 
discover a hidden advantage in their mis-
fortune: I was devastated when the accident 
put an end to my sporting career, but in the idle 
days that followed I discovered I had a talent 
for writing. Every cloud has a silver lining, so 
they say. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1863. Noël Coward was less optimistic 
when he wrote the song “There are Bad 
Times Just Around the Corner” (1953), 
which says “it’s no good whining/About 
a silver lining” in the approaching dark 
clouds.
Variant of this proverb: the darkest 
cloud has a silver lining.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
april showers bring may flowers.
every cock will crow upon his own dung-
hill  People are always at their bravest or 
most self-assured when they are on their 
own home territory: Every cock will crow 
upon his own dunghill, but by the time they had 
crossed to the other side of town, where a rival 
gang held sway, they were looking distinctly ill 
at ease. The proverb is of ancient origin, 
and has been traced back to the writings 
of Seneca (c. 4 b.c.–a.d. 65): “gallum in suo 
sterquilinio plurimum posse [the cock is most 
powerful on his own dunghill].”
Variants of this proverb: a cock is 
mighty in his own backyard; every dog is 
a lion at home.
every cook praises his own broth  Peo-
ple tend to sing the praises of their own 
work. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1663 in Gerbier’s Counsel: “Every cook 
commends his own sauce.”
every country has its own customs  See 
so many countries, so many customs.
every dog has his day  Everybody has a 
spell of good fortune, success, or fame at 
least once in his or her life: Don’t begrudge 
him his moment of triumph—every dog has 
his day. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1545. It occurs in Shakespeare’s play 
Hamlet (5:1): “The cat will mew, and dog 
will have his day.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
everybody has his fifteen minutes of 
fame.
every dog is a lion at home  See every 
cock will crow upon his own dung-
hill.
every dog is allowed one bite  Some-
body may be forgiven for a single misde-
meanor, provided that it does not happen 
again: First offenders are usually let off with a 
warning, on the basis that every dog is allowed 
every bullet has its billet
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   76 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
77
one bite. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1902, but the law on which it based dates 
from at least the 17th century, according 
to which the owner of a domestic animal 
was not responsible for injury caused by 
the animal unless the owner knew of the 
animal’s ferocious tendencies.
every door may be shut but death’s 
door  Death comes to us all, and is the 
only thing in life over which we have 
no control: She knew that she had only a 
few days left to live, and seemed to be facing 
the prospect with uncharacteristic acquies-
cence. “Every door may be shut but death’s 
door,” she explained. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection.
every elm has its man  Elm trees are 
notorious for causing death or serious 
injury: “Owing to the frequency with which 
this tree sheds its branches, or is uprooted 
in a storm, it has earned for itself a sinister 
reputation. ‘Every elm has its man’ is an old 
country saying” (London Times, 1928).
every employee tends to rise to his level 
of incompetence  People in a hierarchi-
cal organization are promoted until they 
reach a position that is just beyond their 
capabilities; this cynical observation implies 
that nobody is fi t to do the work he or she 
is employed to do: The monthly meeting of 
departmental managers did nothing to destroy 
my belief in the theory that every employee tends 
to rise to his level of incompetence. This prov-
erb is known as “The Peter Principle,” hav-
ing been coined by Dr. Laurence J. Peter in 
a book of that name (1969).
every family has a skeleton in the closet 
See there’s a skeleton in every closet.
every herring must hang by its own 
gill  Everybody must take responsibility 
for his or her own actions: If you get into 
trouble, don’t expect me to come and bail you 
out—every herring must hang by its own gill. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1609 by 
Simon Harward, with tail in place of gill.
every horse thinks its own pack heaviest 
Everybody thinks that he or she has harder 
work, greater misfortune, or more prob-
lems than others: I tend to ignore her when she 
starts moaning about her troubles. Every horse 
thinks its own pack heaviest, and I don’t believe 
she is any worse off than the rest of us. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1732, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
earlier origin: in 1573 George Gascoigne 
wrote, “Every body thinketh their own 
greif greatest.”
every Jack has his Jill  Everybody will 
ultimately fi nd a suitable person to share 
his or her life with: “Every Jack has his 
Jill;/If one won’t, the other will” (H. W. 
Thompson, Body, Boots and Britches, 1940). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1611 
in Randle Cotgrave’s A Dictionary of the 
French and English Tongues.
Variant of this proverb: there’s a Jack 
for every Jill.
every land has its own law  Each nation, 
region, class, or profession has its own rules 
and customs, which must be respected by 
outsiders: The traveler must learn to be toler-
ant of the ways of others, remembering that every 
land has its own law. Of Scottish origin, the 
proverb dates from before 1628.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
so many countries, so many customs.
every little helps  All contributions, 
however small, are of use: “‘The Petition 
 every little helps
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   77 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
78
for the Branch Bill is in the coffee-room. 
Would you put your name to it? Every 
little helps’” (Charles Dickens, The Uncom-
mercial Traveller, 1861). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1787, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin. 
In 1623 William Camden wrote, “Euery 
thing helpes, quoth the Wren when she 
pist i’ the sea,” echoing a French saying of 
the 16th century that featured an ant mak-
ing a similar contribution to the waters of 
the ocean.
Variant of this proverb: every little 
bit helps.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: little drops of water, little 
grains of sand, make a mighty ocean 
and a pleasant land; many a little 
makes a mickle.
every man after his fashion  Every indi-
vidual must follow his or her own inclina-
tion: When it came to what to do with their 
free time it was a case of every man after his 
fashion. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1546 by John Heywood in A Dialogue 
containing . . . the Proverbs in the English 
Tongue.
Variant of this proverb: every one 
after his fashion.
every man for himself and God for us 
all  At times of crisis or great danger, 
each must take responsibility for his or 
her own personal survival and hope for 
divine protection for everybody: “‘Every 
man for himself, and God for us all!’ was 
the cool answer of the refractory sea-
man” (Captain Marryat, The King’s Own, 
1830). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1546. In the shorter form “Every 
man for himself ” it is of earlier origin, 
occurring in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales 
(c. 1390): “Ech man for hymself, ther is 
noon oother.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every man for himself and the devil 
take the hindmost.
every man for himself and the devil take 
the hindmost  In highly competitive or 
dangerous situations, you must guard or 
pursue your own interests with ruthless 
disregard for those who are falling behind 
or struggling to cope: “The result was a 
bear-garden, a den of prize-fi ghters, liars, 
cut-throats and thieves in which every man 
was for himself openly and avowedly and 
the devil take the hindmost” (Theodore 
Dreiser, The Genius, 1915). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1858, 
but it is of earlier origin. Either of its two 
parts may be used independently: “The 
devil take the hindmost” occurs in Francis 
Beaumont and John Fletcher’s play Philas-
ter (1620) and expresses a sentiment found 
in the writings of the Roman poet Horace 
(65–8 b.c.), “occupet extremum scabies [may 
the itch take the one who is last].”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every man for himself and god 
for us all; self-preservation is the 
first law of nature.
every man has his price  It is possible to 
bribe anybody, as long as you offer him or 
her enough money: “‘You can do nothing 
with Mowle. He never took a penny in 
his life.’ ‘Oh, every man has his price’” 
(G. P. R. James, The Smuggler, 1845). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1734, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
general use.
every man is his own worst enemy  Peo-
ple often suffer most as a result of their 
every man after his fashion
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   78 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
79
own behavior, attitudes, or nature: They 
say that every man is his own worst enemy, 
and if you weren’t so tactless and insensitive 
you might fi nd it easier to keep your friends! 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in Thomas 
Browne’s Religio Medici (1643).
every man is the architect of his own 
fortune  Everybody is responsible for 
his or her own success or failure in life: 
Every man is the architect of his own fortune, 
and nobody else can be blamed for the fool-
ish decisions that brought you to this crisis. 
The proverb is attributed to the Roman 
politician Appius Claudius Caecus, who 
held the post of censor from 312 b.c. to 
308 b.c.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: life is what you make it; paddle 
your own canoe.
every man must skin his own skunk 
People should be self-reliant and not 
depend on others to do things—espe-
cially unpleasant tasks—for them: She 
raised her children to be independent and 
responsible members of society, one of her favor-
ite sayings being “Every man must skin his own 
skunk.” Of U.S. origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in Dictionary of American-
isms, 1813.
every man thinks his own geese 
swans  Everybody tends to rate his or 
her own children, possessions, or achieve-
ments more highly than others would do: 
We are up against that age-old problem: the 
parents of our students will not accept that 
their offspring are anything but perfect. As the 
saying goes, “Every man thinks his own geese 
swans.” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1526 in the play Magnyfycence by John 
Skelton.
every man to his taste  Different things 
appeal to different people, and taste is a 
highly subjective quality: I wouldn’t want 
a picture like that hanging in my house, but 
every man to his taste. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
1580. It is sometimes quoted in its French 
form, “Chacun à son goût,” or with the face-
tious extension “. . . as the old woman said 
when she kissed the cow.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: one man’s meat is another man’s 
poison; tastes differ; to each his 
own.
every man to his trade  People should 
remain within their own line of work or 
range of knowledge: “. . . one man showed 
me a young oak which he had trans-
planted from behind the town, thinking it 
an apple-tree. But every man to his trade. 
Though he had little woodcraft, he was 
not the less weatherwise, and gave us one 
piece of information; viz. he had observed 
that when a thunder-cloud came up with 
a fl ood-tide it did not rain” (Henry David 
Thoreau, Cape Cod, 1865). The proverb 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, Part 
1 (2:2) in the form: “Every man to his 
business.” The sentiment it expresses is of 
biblical origin: “Let every man abide in 
the same calling wherein he was called” (1 
Corinthians 7:20).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let the cobbler stick to his last.
every one after his fashion   See every 
man after his fashion.
every picture tells a story  Meaning 
is often conveyed by people’s actions, 
movements, gestures, or facial expres-
sions without the need for words: Nobody 
 every picture tells a story
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   79 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
80
actually passed comment on the food, but 
every picture tells a story, and the row of 
empty plates told me all I needed to know. 
First recorded in 1847, the proverb was 
popularized in the early 20th century in 
an advertisement for a backache remedy 
featuring a picture of a person bent 
double in pain.
every rose has a thorn  See there’s no 
rose without a thorn.
every soldier has the baton of a fi eld-
marshal in his knapsack A common 
soldier, or any other worker, may aspire 
to senior rank: He entered the business as a 
lowly sales assistant, but every soldier has the 
baton of a fi eld-marshal in his knapsack and 
fi ve years later he owned the company. First 
recorded in English in 1840, the proverb 
is commonly ascribed to Napoleon, in 
whose army many senior offi cers rose 
from the ranks.
everything comes to those who wait  See 
all things come to him who waits.
everything has an end  Nothing lasts for-
ever; often used of something unpleasant: 
“They devoured the food, and I did like-
wise. . . . everything has an end, everything 
passes away, even the hunger of people 
who have not eaten for fi fteen hours” (Jules 
Verne, 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, 1869). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1385 in 
Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde.
Variant of this proverb: all things 
come to an end.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
time ends all things.
everything is good in its season Food-
stuffs and other items are best enjoyed 
when at their prime: Everything is good 
in its season, but few vegetables are at their 
best all year round. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1591 by W. Stepney in The 
Spanish Schoolmaster.
everything old is new again  Old ideas, 
fashions, or methods often return to 
popularity after a long absence, and are 
sometimes perceived or presented as 
innovations: “Like so many products on 
the market today, fruit butters prove the 
adage, ‘What’s old is new again’” (New 
York Times, 1991). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1824, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of much earlier 
origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s nothing new under the sun.
every tub must stand on its own bottom 
People should be self-suffi cient and not 
dependent on others, fi nancially or oth-
erwise: “She would have had me support 
the old man in idleness, but I am not one 
of that kind. Every tub should stand on 
its own bottom” (Horatio Alger, Driven 
from Home, 1889). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1564 in W. Bullein’s Dia-
logue Against Fever. The word stand may be 
replaced by sit or rest.
every why hath its wherefore Everything 
has an underlying reason: “For they say 
every why hath a wherefore” (William 
Shakespeare, The Comedy of Errors). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1566 by 
George Gascoigne in Supposes.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s reason in all things.
evil be to him who thinks it Those 
who wish ill upon others deserve ill 
every rose has a thorn
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   80 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
81
luck themselves. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1387 by Geoffrey Chaucer in 
The Canterbury Tales: “Now the evyl which 
men wysshe to other cometh to hym 
which wyssheth it.”
evil communications corrupt good man-
ners  Good people can be led astray by 
listening to bad ideas, associating with 
bad people, or following a bad example: 
His parents did their best to steer him away 
from potentially harmful infl uences during his 
formative years, on the basis that evil commu-
nications corrupt good manners. The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “Be not deceived: evil 
communications corrupt good manners” 
(1 Corinthians 15:33).
evil doers are evil dreaders  Criminals 
and other wrongdoers have a tendency 
to fear and suspect all those around them; 
sometimes used to imply that a distrust-
ful person has something on his or her 
conscience: “Put me not to quote the old 
saw, that evil doers are evil dreaders.—It is 
your suspicion, not your knowledge, which 
speaks” (Sir Walter Scott, The Fair Maid 
of Perth, 1828). The proverb dates from 
before 1568 in the form “Ill doings, breed 
ill thinkings” (R. Ascham, Schoolmaster).
Variant of this proverb: Ill doers are 
ill dreaders.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
do right and fear no man.
example is better than precept  It is 
better to teach somebody what to do by 
doing it yourself rather than by giving 
advice or instructions; usually applied to 
correct behavior, but equally applicable 
in other contexts: Example is better than 
precept, and if more parents could be persuaded 
to adopt a healthy lifestyle, then perhaps their 
children would follow suit. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, c. 
1400.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good example is the best sermon.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: do as i say, not as i do.
the exception proves the rule  The exis-
tence of an exception to a rule shows that 
the rule itself exists and is applicable in 
other cases; often used loosely to explain 
away any such inconsistency: “You will 
fi nd no such unimaginative people any-
where as you fi nd in Italy, Spain, Greece, 
and the other Southern countries. . . . 
Now and then, in the course of centuries, 
a great genius springs up among them; 
and he is the exception which proves 
the rule” (Wilkie Collins, The Haunted 
Hotel, 1878). First recorded in this form 
in 1664, the proverb is of Latin origin: 
“exceptio probat regulam in casibus non excep-
tis [the exception confi rms the rule in 
cases not excepted].” In his Devil’s Dic-
tionary (1911), the U.S. writer Ambrose 
Bierce observed: “‘The exception proves 
the rule’ is an expression constantly upon 
the lips of the ignorant, who parrot it 
from one another with never a thought of 
its absurdity.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s an exception to every rule.
expect nothing and you won’t be dis-
appointed  See blessed are they who 
expect nothing, for they shall not be 
disappointed.
experience is a comb that fate gives a 
man when his hair is all gone  Experi-
ence often comes too late to be of any use: 
It was only after working in the industry for 
 experience is a comb that fate gives a man when his hair is all gone
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   81 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
82
many years that I realized what a foolish invest-
ment I had made at the outset. As they say, expe-
rience is a comb which fate gives a man when his 
hair is all gone. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
experience is the best teacher  The best 
way to learn is by doing things yourself, 
and by having the good sense not to 
repeat any mistakes you make along the 
way: Experience is the best teacher, and I soon 
learned to approach the larger animals in my 
care with a mixture of caution and respect. 
First recorded in this form in 1803, the 
proverb is of Latin origin: “experientia docet 
[experience teaches].”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
don’t make the same mistake twice; an 
ounce of practice is worth a pound of 
precept; years know more than books.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: experience is the teacher of fools.
experience is the mother of wisdom 
You cannot attain great wisdom or knowl-
edge other than by practical experience 
and learning from your mistakes: “If it 
be true, that experience is the mother of 
wisdom, history must be an improving 
teacher” (American Museum, 1788). First 
recorded in the 16th century, the proverb 
is of ancient Greek origin.
Variants of this proverb: experience 
is the father of wisdom; experience is the 
mother of knowledge.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: live and learn; the older the 
wiser.
experience is the teacher of fools  It 
is foolish to learn—or to expect other 
people to learn—solely by making mis-
takes; also used with the implication that 
wise people learn from others’ mistakes 
rather than their own: How many more 
patients must be killed by inadequately trained 
medical staff before the government will accept 
the fact that experience is the teacher of fools? 
The proverb dates from before 1568 in 
the form “Experience is the common 
schoolhouse of fools.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
learn from the mistakes of others.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: experience is the best teacher.
experience keeps a dear school  Learn-
ing by your mistakes is often a costly 
exercise: Experience keeps a dear school, and 
the armed forces are now counting the cost of 
this ill-fated mission. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1743, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Variant of this proverb: experience 
keeps a dear school, but fools will learn 
in no other.  
extremes meet  People and things that 
seem to be diametrically opposed are 
often found to have a point of contact: 
“. . . the contrast could not be much 
greater between . . . a meek sheep and the 
rough-coated keen-eyed dog, its guardian. 
He had spoken of Mr. Rochester as an old 
friend. A curious friendship theirs must 
have been: a pointed illustration, indeed, 
of the old adage that ‘extremes meet’” 
(Charlotte Brontë, Jane Eyre, 1847). The 
proverb comes from the French mathema-
tician and writer Pascal’s Pensées (1669): 
“les extrèmes se touchent [extremes meet].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opposites attract.
an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a 
tooth  Retaliation or punishment should 
experience is the best teacher
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   82 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
83
take the same form as the original offense 
or crime: In a country where the justice system 
is based on the principle of “An eye for an eye, 
and a tooth for a tooth,” the death penalty is 
the only appropriate punishment for the crime 
of murder. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for 
hand, foot for foot” (Exodus 21:24).
the eye is bigger than the belly  Greed 
persuades a person to take more than 
he or she can manage: He had to concede, 
as he pushed his plate away, that his eye was 
bigger than his belly. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1580 by John Lyly in 
Euphues and his England. The proverb is 
usually quoted in relation to food but 
may also be applied in other contexts, 
such as money.
the eye of a master does more work 
than both his hands  Constant super-
vision is the key to getting the best 
performance from your employees or 
domestic staff: If you want to increase 
productivity, get out of your cozy little offi ce 
and spend more time in the factory—the eye 
of the master does more work than both his 
hands. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1744, in Benjamin Franklin’s Poor 
Richard’s Almanack.
the eyes are the mirrors of the soul  A 
person’s eyes will often reveal his or her 
inmost thoughts, feelings, or character: 
Aware that the eyes are the mirrors of the soul, 
and anxious to keep her true feelings from him, 
she turned her face away before she spoke. First 
recorded in English in 1545 in T. Phaer’s 
Regiment of Life, the proverb is of Latin 
origin.
Variants of this proverb: the eyes are 
the windows of the soul; the face is the 
index of the mind.
 the eyes are the mirrors of the soul