84
the face is the index of the mind  See 
the eyes are the mirrors of the soul.
fact is stranger than fi ction  Things 
that happen in real life are often far more 
unlikely than those dreamed up by writ-
ers: If the events of that day had been put 
forward as the plot of a TV drama, the idea 
would have been rejected as utterly implausible. 
But fact is stranger than fi ction. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1853 in T. C. 
Haliburton’s Sam Slick’s Wise Saws.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
truth is stranger than fiction.
facts are stubborn things  The truth 
cannot be disputed, disproved, or ignored: 
“‘Well, you get your money easy. . . . All 
you have to do is to sit there and hear les-
sons.’ I used to argue the matter at fi rst, 
but I’m wiser now. Facts are stubborn 
things, but as some one has wisely said, 
not half so stubborn as fallacies.” (Lucy 
Maud Montgomery, Anne of the Island, 
1915). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1732 in E. Budgell’s Liberty & Progress.
faint heart never won fair lady  It is 
necessary to be bold and courageous to 
win the heart of a woman—or to achieve 
any other cherished objective: “Of course 
there would be diffi culty. But was it not 
the business of his life to overcome dif-
fi culties? Had he not already overcome 
one diffi culty almost as great; and why 
should he be afraid of this other? Faint 
heart never won fair lady!” (Anthony Trol-
lope, Phineas Finn, 1869).The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
1545, but it is probably of ancient origin. 
The current form dates from 1614 or ear-
lier, and occurs in Gilbert and Sullivan’s 
comic opera Iolanthe (1882).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
none but the brave deserve the fair.
fair and softly goes far in a day  If you 
proceed with care, or at a gentle pace, 
you will achieve far more than if you 
rush; also used to recommend a tact-
ful approach when dealing with people: 
Don’t try to do too much too soon—remember 
the proverb, “Fair and softly goes far in a day.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1350 in 
Douce MS 52.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
slow and steady wins the race.
a fair exchange is no robbery  Exchang-
ing things of equivalent worth is a fair 
transaction; also used to justify taking 
something from somebody who has taken 
something from you: He gave me his leather 
jacket, which had a tear in the sleeve, and I 
f
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   84 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
85
gave him my CD player with its broken head-
phones—a fair exchange is no robbery! The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in 
John Heywood’s Dialogue of Proverbs.
fair feathers make fair fowl  See fine 
feathers make fine birds.
fair play’s a jewel  Sportsmanlike behav-
ior is of the utmost importance in any 
competitive situation: Let’s start again, and 
this time there’s to be no cheating. Fair play’s 
a jewel. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1809, in Washington Irving’s A History of 
New York, but with the implication that it 
was already in general use.
fair words butter no cabbage  See fine 
words butter no parsnips.
faith will move mountains  Nothing is 
impossible to those who have suffi cient 
faith; applied not only to religious faith, 
but to any strong belief in a cause or objec-
tive: She fi rmly believes that she can make him 
change his ways, and faith will move mountains, 
so she may yet succeed. The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “If ye have faith as a grain of 
mustard seed, ye shall say unto this moun-
tain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it 
shall remove; and nothing shall be impos-
sible unto you” (Matthew 17:20).
Variant of this proverb: faith can 
move mountains.
the falling out of lovers is the renewing 
of love  See the quarrel of lovers is 
the renewal of love.
familiarity breeds contempt  We tend 
to lose respect for people or things as we 
become better acquainted with them; also 
used in a wide range of other contexts, 
such as when somebody develops a dan-
gerously blasé approach to a task that has 
become routine: “. . . he sat himself down 
to ruminate upon his prospects, which, 
like the prospect outside his window, 
were suffi ciently confi ned and dingy. As 
they by no means improved on better 
acquaintance, and as familiarity breeds 
contempt, he resolved to banish them 
from his thoughts by dint of hard walk-
ing” (Charles Dickens, Nicholas Nickleby, 
1838–39). The proverb is of ancient 
origin, and has been traced back to the 
writings of Publilius Syrus (fi rst cen-
tury b.c.). The sentiment it expresses 
can be found in one of the fables of 
Aesop (sixth century b.c.), in which 
a fox gradually loses its fear of a lion. 
The facetious variant “Familiarity breeds 
contempt—and children” is attributed 
to Mark Twain.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
no man is a hero to his valet.
the family that prays together stays 
together  Families that share the same 
religious faith remain united: “Mother 
Teresa opined . . . ‘The family that prays 
together stays together; and if you stay 
together, you will love one another with 
the same love with which God loves each 
one of us’” (Washington Post, 1996). The 
proverb was coined in the 1940s as a slo-
gan of the Roman Catholic Family Rosary 
Crusade. In modern usage other words are 
sometimes substituted for prays—notably 
plays, encouraging families to engage in 
leisure activities together.
fancy passes beauty  It is more impor-
tant that a potential partner is likeable 
than good-looking: The duke’s friends were 
initially surprised at his choice of wife, who 
 fancy passes beauty
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   85 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
86
was far from the fi rst fl ush of youth, but 
fancy passes beauty. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1678 by John Ray in A Collec-
tion of English Proverbs.
far away the hills are green  See blue 
are the hills that are far away.
far-fetched and dear-bought is good 
for ladies  Women like expensive things 
from exotic places: Browsing through a cat-
alog of Christmas gifts that arrived in the mail 
this morning, it occurred to me that the old 
proverb “Far-fetched and dear-bought is good 
for ladies” still has some relevance in modern 
times. The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 
1350 in Douce MS 52.
the farthest way about is the nearest way 
home  See the longest way around is 
the shortest way home.
a fat kitchen makes a lean will  Those 
who eat well all their lives will have little 
money left when they die: Their lavish din-
ner parties were a legend in the neighborhood, 
but a fat kitchen makes a lean will, and nobody 
was surprised when the deplorable state of their 
fi nancial affairs came to light. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1948 in a U.S. prov-
erb collection.
Variant of this proverb: a fat kitchen 
makes a lean purse.
a fault confessed is half redressed  The 
act of confessing that you have done some-
thing wrong goes some way toward mak-
ing amends for your offense or error: “A 
fault confessed is half redressed, so I hope 
he will forgive us” (Peter O’Donnell, The 
Xanadu Talisman, 1981). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
in 1558.
faults are thick where love is thin  Peo-
ple are quick to fi nd faults in those they 
do not like: She had little good to say 
about her husband, but faults are thick where 
love is thin. This Welsh proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1616 by T. Draxe in Biblio-
theca Scholastica.
fear lends wings  Fear inspires extra 
speed in those attempting to escape what-
ever threatens them: “Therto fear gave 
her wings” (Edmund Spenser, The Faerie 
Queene, 1590). This French proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1580 by Philip 
Sidney in Arcadia.
fear the Greeks bearing gifts  See 
beware of greeks bearing gifts.
feed a cold and starve a fever  You should 
eat well when you have a cold but fast when 
you have a fever: “‘Forget about feeding 
a cold and starving a fever,’ Dr. Edelman 
said, adding there is no medical reason 
for diet changes” (Washington Times, 1997). 
The proverb is sometimes interpreted as a 
warning that eating well during a cold will 
bring on a fever, or if you feed a cold now 
you will have to starve a fever later. Other 
confl icting explanations interpret starve as 
“prevent” or even “die of.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1832, but fasting has 
been recommended as a remedy for fever 
since the 16th century or earlier.
Variant of this proverb: stuff a cold 
and starve a fever.
the female of the species is deadlier 
than the male  Women often prove to be 
more dangerous than men, when roused to 
anger; the proverb also is used literally in 
natural history contexts: The female of the 
species is deadlier than the male, and they don’t 
far away the hills are green
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   86 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
87
come much deadlier than the mother who thinks 
her child has been wrongly accused. The prov-
erb comes from Rudyard Kipling’s poem 
The Female of the Species (1911): “When the 
Himalayan peasant meets the he-bear in his 
pride,/He shouts to scare the monster, who 
will often turn aside./But the she-bear thus 
accosted rends the peasant tooth and nail/
For the female of the species is more deadly 
than the male.” A jocular modern variant 
of the proverb reported among computer 
users runs: “The email of the species is 
more deadly than the mail.”
few words are best  It is best to com-
municate meaning in as few words as 
possible: “Wherefore, few words are 
best, wench” (Walter Scott, The Fair Maid 
of Perth, 1828). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1600 in Roxburghe Ballads.
fi elds have eyes and woods have ears 
There are very few places where you can 
do or say something without the risk of 
being seen or overheard: Although they 
were careful never to meet in public places, their 
affair did not remain a secret for long—fi elds 
have eyes and woods have ears. First recorded 
c. 1225, the proverb occurs in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
walls have ears.
fi ght fi re with fi re  The best way to deal 
with an opponent or an attack is to fi ght 
back with similar weapons or tactics: Fight 
fi re with fi re—if they resort to underhand 
methods to win over your customers, then you 
must not be afraid to do likewise. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1869, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of much 
earlier origin. Shakespeare’s play Coriola-
nus (4:7) contains the line “One fi re drives 
out one fi re,” and a 14th-century French 
proverb translates as “One fi re must put 
out another.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
like cures like.
fi nd a penny, pick it up, all day long you’ll 
have good luck  See see a pin and pick 
it up, all the day you’ll have good 
luck.
fi nders keepers, losers weepers  If you 
lose something and it is found by another, 
you have no right to reclaim it and must 
bear your loss as best you can: The boy 
found his sister’s missing watch and carried it 
off triumphantly to his room. “Finders keepers, 
losers weepers,” he jeered. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1825 in J. T. Brockett’s 
Glossary of North Country Words.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
finding is keeping.
fi nding is keeping  The person who 
fi nds something is entitled to keep it: In 
this country the principle of “fi nding is keep-
ing” is not enshrined in law, and whoever found 
and kept the missing money is no better than 
a thief. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1863 in John Hanning Speke’s Journal of 
the Discovery of the Source of the Nile.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
finders keepers, losers weepers.
fi ne feathers make fi ne birds  By dress-
ing in elegant or good-quality clothing, 
people create a favorable impression on 
others, often appearing to be of better 
breeding or higher class than they are: 
“Mrs. Joe . . . essayed to pick her to pieces, 
intimating that she was much indebted to 
her dress—that fi ne feathers made fi ne 
birds” (Robert Smith Surtees, Ask Mamma, 
 fi ne feathers make fi ne birds
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   87 1/29/07   5:12:31 PM
88
1858). Of French origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in the late 16th 
century. It is also used in the opposite form, 
“Fine feathers don’t make fi ne birds.”
Variant of this proverb: fair feathers 
make fair fowl.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
clothes make the man.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: clothes don’t make the man.
fi ne words butter no parsnips  Promises 
or compliments are pleasant to hear but 
serve no practical purpose unless they are 
backed up by action: “‘Ye speak reason-
ably, my lord,’ said Dalgetty, ‘and, ceteris 
paribus, I might be induced to see the mat-
ter in the same light. But, my lord, there 
is a southern proverb,—fi ne words butter 
no parsnips’” (Sir Walter Scott, A Legend 
of Montrose, 1819). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1639.
Variant of this proverb: fair words 
butter no cabbage.
fi ngers were made before forks  People 
ate with their hands before cutlery was 
invented; used as an excuse for picking up 
food with your fi ngers at table: After several 
attempts to spear an onion she gave up and 
removed one from the pot by hand. “Fingers were 
made before forks,” she said apologetically. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1567 in the 
form “God made hands before knives.” The 
current form occurs in Jonathan Swift’s 
Polite Conversation (1738): “Fingers were 
made before Forks, and Hands before 
Knives.”
Variant of this proverb: fi ngers were 
made before knives and forks.
fi re is a good servant but a bad master 
Fire is very useful when it is under con-
trol, but highly dangerous when it takes 
control: Many forest fi res are caused by some 
careless person who has dropped a match 
after lighting a cigarette, or failed to extin-
guish a campfi re, having forgotten—or never 
heard—the saying “Fire is a good servant but a 
bad master.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1615 in T. Adams’s England’s Sickness. 
Other words are sometimes substituted 
for fi re, such as money or alcohol.
Variant of this proverb: fi re and 
water are good servants but bad masters.
fi rst catch your hare  Do not act in 
anticipation of something that is yet to 
be achieved: “A modern cookery-book, 
in giving a recipe for cooking a hare, says, 
‘fi rst catch your hare, and then kill it’; a 
maxim of indisputable wisdom. The Chris-
tian chiefs on this occasion had not so much 
sagacity, for they began a violent dispute 
among themselves for the possession of a 
city which was still unconquered” (Charles 
MacKay, Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular 
Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, 1841). 
The proverb is popularly and erroneously 
believed to be the opening line of a recipe 
in an 18th- or 19th-century cookbook. It is 
actually of much earlier origin, and was fi rst 
recorded c. 1300 in Latin, with deer in place 
of hare: “vulgariter dicitur, quod primo opporte 
cervum capere [it is commonly said that one 
must fi rst catch the deer].”
Variant of this proverb: fi rst catch 
your rabbit and then make your stew.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t count your chickens before 
they are hatched.
fi rst come, fi rst served  Those who 
arrive or apply earliest are most likely to 
get what they want from a limited sup-
ply of things, such as tickets, discounted 
fi ne words butter no parsnips
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   88 1/29/07   5:12:31 PM
89
goods, or refreshments: “I have little 
doubt of procuring a remission for you, 
provided we can keep you out of the claws 
of justice till she has selected and gorged 
upon her victims; for in this, as in other 
cases, it will be according to the vulgar 
proverb, ‘First come, fi rst served’” (Sir 
Walter Scott, Waverly, 1814). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1548, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin. The 13th-century French proverb 
“qui ainçois vient au molin ainçois doit moldre 
[he who comes fi rst to the mill may grind 
fi rst]” recurs 100 years later in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390).
Variant of this proverb: fi rst there, 
fi rst served.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the early bird catches the worm.
the fi rst duty of a soldier is obedience 
No army can be an effi cient fi ghting force 
unless its members are prepared to obey 
orders without question: I was aware that 
this action would cause the death of hundreds 
of innocent civilians, but I had to follow the 
instructions of my commanding offi cer—the 
fi rst duty of a soldier is obedience. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1872, but earlier 
evidence suggests that it had long been in 
general use.
the fi rst hundred years are the hardest 
Life will always be diffi cult; said jocu-
larly or ironically to those who complain 
about their problems, sometimes with 
the implication that things will improve 
eventually: We had a rocky time during the 
early months of our marriage, and the only 
words of consolation I got from my mother were, 
“Don’t worry—the fi rst hundred years are the 
hardest!” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1928. Other periods may be substituted 
for hundred years, such as nine months (for a 
pregnant woman) or four years (for a col-
lege student).
fi rst impressions are the most lasting 
An initial opinion formed of somebody 
or something at the fi rst encounter lin-
gers in the mind and is diffi cult to efface: 
When approaching a potential new customer, 
whether in person, by phone or mail, or through 
advertising, always remember that fi rst impres-
sions are the most lasting. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in William Congreve’s play 
The Way of the World (1700) in the form 
“There is a great deal in the fi rst impres-
sion.”
the fi rst seven years are the hardest The 
fi rst stage in any enterprise is the hard-
est: “Never mind,” the older man said as he 
helped his young apprentice up from the fl oor, 
“the fi rst seven years are the hardest.” The 
origins of this proverb are obscure, but it 
probably made its fi rst appearance during 
World War I, when soldiers signed up 
for seven years’ service. It is commonly 
applied to marriage or new jobs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the first step is the hardest.
the fi rst step is the hardest  Making a 
start is often the most diffi cult part of an 
undertaking: If only I could pluck up cour-
age to speak to her, I know that the rest would 
be easy—the fi rst step is always the hardest. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1596 
in the form “The fi rst stretch [of a jour-
ney] is the worst.” It is popularly associ-
ated with the story that Saint Denis, 
patron saint of France, walked several 
miles with his head in his hands after 
being executed, and that on learning of 
this, a French noblewoman remarked, 
 the fi rst step is the hardest
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   89 1/29/07   5:12:31 PM
90
“Ce n’est que le premier pas qui coûte [It’s 
only the fi rst step that counts].”
Variant of this proverb: it’s the fi rst 
step that is diffi cult.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the first seven years are the 
hardest; a journey of a thousand 
miles begins with one step.
fi rst there, fi rst served  See first come, 
first served.
fi rst things fi rst  It is important to do 
things in the proper order, and not to omit 
a basic fi rst step: First things fi rst, before we 
come to look at the product’s new features, how 
much does it cost? The proverb comes from 
the title of a book published in 1894.
Variant of this proverb: put fi rst 
things fi rst.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t put the cart before the horse.
fi rst think, and then speak  See think 
before you speak.
fi rst thrive and then wive  It is sensible to 
get established in a career before getting 
married. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1608–09 by William Shakespeare in 
Pericles (5,2): “So he thriv’d that he is 
promis’d to be wiv’d to fair Marina.”
fi rst try and then trust  Before relying 
upon something (or someone), it is best 
to test it fi rst: The safest principle when it 
comes to old bridges is fi rst try and then trust. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 by 
J. Clarke in Paroemiographia Anglo-Latina.
Variant of this proverb: try before 
you trust.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
trust not one night’s ice.
the fi sh always stinks from the head 
downward  See a fish stinks from the 
head.
fi sh and guests stink after three 
days  Guests who stay for longer than 
three days risk becoming a burden or an 
irritation to their hosts: “How long should 
she stay? She remembered the universal 
truth that fi sh and guests smell after three 
days” (J. S. Borthwick, Down East Murders, 
1985). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1580, but the sentiment it expresses 
occurs in Miles Gloriosus by the Roman 
dramatist Plautus (c. 254–184 b.c.).
Variant of this proverb: fish and 
visitors smell in three days.
Proverbs expressing a similar mean-
ing: a constant guest is never wel-
come; short visits make long friends.
fi sh begin to stink at the head  See a 
fish stinks from the head.
fi sh or cut bait  The time has come to 
choose between two courses of action—
either get on with what you have to do, or 
go away and let somebody else do it: It’s 
fi sh or cut bait—if you’re not prepared to give 
this job the 100% commitment it requires, then 
clear your desk and make way for somebody 
who will. Of U.S. origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1876, in the record of a 
debate in the House of Representatives. 
The phrase cut bait means “stop fi shing.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
piss or get off the pot.
a fi sh stinks from the head  A corrupting 
infl uence often spreads from a leader to the 
rest of the organization or group: The moral 
decline in this country can be traced back to the 
questionable behavior of those in high offi ce—a 
fi rst there, fi rst served
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   90 1/29/07   5:12:31 PM
91
fi sh stinks from the head. First recorded in 
English in 1581, the proverb is of ancient 
origin. It refers to the fact that fi sh tend to 
rot from the head toward the tail.
Variants of this proverb: the fi sh 
always stinks from the head downward; 
fi sh begin to stink at the head.
fi sh where the fi sh are  If you want to 
obtain or achieve something, you must 
concentrate your efforts and attention 
on the places, people, or activities that 
are most likely to bring success: “Metro-
North and its agency . . . are putting a 
new twist on the marketing adage to 
‘fi sh where the fi sh are.’ The commuter 
railroad is sponsoring outdoor advertise-
ments, situated where it believes poten-
tial customers—frustrated drivers who 
might prefer taking the train—are sure to 
see it” (New York Times, 1992). The proverb 
is thought to be of recent origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
go hunting where the ducks are.
fl attery, like perfume, should be smelled 
but not swallowed  There is no harm 
in taking pleasure from fl attery, but do 
not make the mistake of believing it: He 
acknowledged the compliment with a gracious 
smile, but I could see that he was not going to let 
it affect his decision. Somebody had obviously 
told him that fl attery, like perfume, should be 
smelled but not swallowed. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1858 in H. W. Shaw’s Josh 
Billings’ Philosophy.
fl ing dirt enough, and some will 
stick  See throw dirt enough, and 
some will stick.
fl owers leave fragrance in the hand that 
bestows them  A person who gives usu-
ally derives some benefi t from the act 
of giving: “As artists fi nd joy in giving 
beauty to others, so anyone who masters 
the art of praising will fi nd that it blesses 
the giver as much as the receiver. There is 
truth in the saying, ‘Flowers leave part of 
their fragrance in the hand that bestows 
them’” (Reader’s Digest, 1991). The prov-
erb is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
food without hospitality is medicine  It 
is hard to enjoy refreshments that are 
offered with ill grace, or without friendly 
companionship: Although she arrived much 
later than expected and I was longing to go 
to bed, I stayed up to chat while she ate the 
sandwiches I had prepared for her. I know 
from experience that food without hospitality 
is medicine. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
a fool and his money are soon parted 
Foolish people are easily swindled or per-
suaded to waste their money: Thousands 
of people bought the expensive potion, which 
claimed to reverse the aging process, proving 
that a fool and his money are soon parted. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1587 in J. Bridges’s Defence of Government 
in Church of England.
a fool at forty is a fool indeed  People 
who have not gained the wisdom of expe-
rience by the time they reach middle age 
are likely to remain fools for the rest of 
their lives: You might expect a man of his 
age to have a bit more common sense, but I’ve 
given up hope of changing him now—a fool at 
forty is a fool indeed! The current form of 
the proverb comes from Edward Young’s 
The Universal Passion (1725): “Be wise with 
speed;/A fool at forty is a fool indeed,” 
 a fool at forty is a fool indeed
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   91 1/29/07   5:12:31 PM
92
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Variant of this proverb: A fool over 
forty is a fool indeed.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s no fool like an old fool.
a fool can ask more questions in an hour 
than a wise man can answer in seven 
years  See fools ask questions that 
wise men cannot answer.
a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin 
of little minds  A lack of fl exibility in 
making judgments is regarded as a sign 
of petty narrow-mindedness: “‘You can 
say consistency is the hobgoblin of small 
minds and accuse me of having a small 
mind; I’ll take it,’ he told reporters . . ., 
referring to his opposition to capital pun-
ishment and his support for tax cuts. ‘But 
I have been consistent. Maybe consistently 
wrong in your book. But consistent’” (New 
York Times, 1994). The proverb comes from 
Ralph Waldo Emerson’s essay “Self-Reli-
ance” (1841): “A foolish consistency is the 
hobgoblin of little minds, adored by little 
statesmen and philosophers and divines.”
Variant of this proverb: consistency 
is the hobgoblin of little minds.
a fool may give a wise man counsel 
People are often able to give good advice 
to those who are considered to be intel-
lectually superior; sometimes said apolo-
getically by the giver of such advice, or 
used as a warning against disregarding 
it: If a fool may give a wise man counsel, 
I would suggest you make further inquiries 
before signing the contract. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1641, but 
the sentiment it expresses is found in the 
romance Ywain and Gawain (c. 1350).
fool me once, shame on you; fool me 
twice, shame on me  Somebody who is 
taken in by a hoax or swindle on one occa-
sion may justifi ably blame the perpetrator, 
but those who fall victim a second time 
have only themselves to blame: I believed 
her story last time, to my cost, but I won’t be 
caught out if she tries the same trick again. As 
they say, “Fool me once, shame on you; fool me 
twice, shame on me.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded as recently as 1980, but with the 
implication that it was a well-established 
saying. It was probably originally used by 
children.
a fool over forty is a fool indeed  See a 
fool at forty is a fool indeed.
fools and children should never see half-
done work  You should not judge the 
quality of a piece of work until it is com-
plete, because it often appears unpromis-
ing in its unfi nished form; sometimes said 
in response to criticism, or as a reason for 
not letting such work be seen: “No stage of 
the manufacture was incredible by itself, 
but the result was incredible . . . authen-
ticating the adage that fools and children 
should never see anything till it is done” 
(Arnold Bennett, Anna of the Five Towns, 
1902). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1721 in James Kelly’s Scottish Proverbs.
fools ask questions that wise men can-
not answer  It is often better not to ask 
too many questions, or to avoid showing 
your ignorance; sometimes said to those 
who disregard this advice: I longed to ask 
him to translate what had just been said, but 
remembering the proverb “Fools ask questions 
that wise men cannot answer,” I decided to hold 
my tongue. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1666, in an Italian proverb collection.
a fool can ask more questions in an hour than a wise man can answer in seven years
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   92 1/29/07   5:12:32 PM
93
Variant of this proverb: a fool can 
ask more questions in an hour than a wise 
man can answer in seven years.
a fool’s bolt is soon shot  Foolish people 
act hastily and thus waste their efforts: 
“‘Your bolt is soon shot, according to 
the old proverb,’ said she” (Tobias Smol-
lett, Roderick Random, 1748). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1320 in Proverbs of 
Alfred. The allusion is to a crossbow bolt, 
which is likely to miss its target if fi red 
too quickly.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
hasty climbers have sudden falls.
fools build houses and wise men live in 
them  The cost of building property is 
such that those who build houses cannot 
afford to live in them, and have to sell 
them to recoup their losses; also applied 
to other things that are expensive to pro-
duce: They borrowed a huge sum of money to 
build their dream home, and were forced to sell 
it for a price that barely covered the interest 
on the loan, a classic illustration of the adage 
“Fools build houses and wise men live in them.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, in its 
variant form, in 1670.
Variant of this proverb: fools build 
houses and wise men buy them.
fools rush in where angels fear to 
tread  Foolish people often act reck-
lessly or impetuously in situations that 
others would approach with caution or 
avoid altogether: Fools rush in where angels 
fear to tread—he must be either very brave 
or very foolish to enter into negotiations with 
terrorists like these. The proverb comes 
from Alexander Pope’s Essay on Criticism 
(1711): “No place so Sacred from such 
Fops is barr’d, Nor is Paul’s Church more 
safe than Paul’s Church-yard: Nay, fl y to 
Altars; there they’ll talk you dead; For 
Fools rush in where Angels fear to tread.”
footprints on the sands of time are not 
made by sitting down  People who idle 
their lives away will not make a lasting 
impression on history or be remembered 
for their great achievements; used as a 
spur to action and industry: Her motto was 
“Footprints on the sands of time are not made by 
sitting down,” and her energy and commitment 
to the cause was an example to us all. The 
phrase footprints on the sands of time comes 
from Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s 
poem A Psalm of Life (1839): “Lives of great 
men all remind us/We can make our lives 
sublime,/And, departing, leave behind 
us/Footprints on the sands of time.”
forbidden fruit is sweet  Things that you 
must not have or do are always the most 
desirable: “There are many portals forbid-
den to me, as there are many forbidden 
to all men; and forbidden fruit, they say, 
is sweet; but my lips have watered after no 
other fruit but that which grows so high, 
within the sweep of that great police-
man’s truncheon” (Anthony Trollope, Can 
You Forgive Her?, 1864). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390). The 
phrase forbidden fruit alludes to the fruit of 
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil 
in the Garden of Eden, which Adam and 
Eve were forbidden to eat.
Variants of this proverb: forbidden 
fruit is the sweetest; stolen fruit is sweet.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
stolen water is sweet.
forewarned is forearmed  Advance 
warning of something gives you the 
 forewarned is forearmed
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   93 1/29/07   5:12:32 PM
94
opportunity to prepare for it: “‘You 
think,’ continued Max, smiling at God-
det’s speech, ‘that I intend to marry Flore 
when Père Rouget dies, and so this sister 
and her son, of whom I hear to-night for 
the fi rst time, will endanger my future?’ 
‘That’s just it,’ cried François. . . . ‘Well, 
don’t be uneasy, friends,’ answered Max. 
‘Forewarned is forearmed!’” (Honoré de 
Balzac, Two Brothers, 1843). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English, with differ-
ent wording c. 1425. Compare the Latin 
saying “praemonitus, praemunitus [fore-
warned, forearmed].”
to forget a wrong is the best revenge  See 
the best way to get even is to forget.
forgive and forget  Do not bear 
grudges—forgive those who have wronged 
you and forget the wrong: “He spoke sud-
denly, as if concluding a discussion. ‘The 
best thing for us is to forget all this.’ She 
started a little and shut the fan with a click. 
‘Yes, forgive—and forget,’ he repeated, as if 
to himself ” (Joseph Conrad, Tales of Unrest, 
1898). The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 
1377 in William Langland’s Piers Plowman. It 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play King Lear (4:7) 
in the form “forget and forgive.”
Variant of this proverb: good to for-
give, best to forget.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let bygones be bygones.
fortune favors fools  Foolish people 
often have good luck, or succeed by 
chance: “. . . fortune favours fools and his 
very stupidity served him well at the end” 
(Eden Phillpotts, Red Redmaynes, 1922). 
Of Latin origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1546 in the form 
“God sends fortune to fools.”
fortune favors the brave  Those who 
act boldly or courageously are most likely 
to succeed: They say that fortune favors the 
brave, and I hope they are right, because it’s too 
late to turn back now! Of ancient origin, the 
proverb occurs in Virgil’s Aeneid (fi rst cen-
tury b.c.): “audentes fortuna iuvat [fortune 
aids the bold].”
Variant of this proverb: fortune 
favors the bold.
for want of a nail the shoe was lost, 
for want of a shoe the horse was lost, 
and for want of a horse the rider was 
lost  Do not neglect minor details that 
seem insignifi cant in themselves: We must 
check and double-check everything—even the 
smallest error or omission may have disastrous 
consequences. Remember the proverb “For want 
of a nail the shoe was lost, for want of a shoe 
the horse was lost, and for want of a horse the 
rider was lost.” First recorded in this form in 
George Herbert’s Outlandish Proverbs (1640) 
the proverb may be of French origin.
Variant of this proverb: for want of a 
nail the kingdom was lost.
four eyes see more than two  Two peo-
ple keeping watch, supervising, or search-
ing have a better chance of noticing or 
fi nding something: I’ve read the essay over, 
but I’d be grateful if you would have a look at 
it too, in case I’ve missed any errors—four eyes 
see more than two. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, in its variant form, in 1591.
Variant of this proverb: two eyes see 
more than one.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
two heads are better than one.
the fox preys furthest from his hole 
Criminals and other persons engaged in 
illicit activity operate away from their 
to forget a wrong is the best revenge
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   94 1/29/07   5:12:32 PM
95
home territory, where they may be rec-
ognized: In robbing the local newsagent he 
ignored the old saw that the fox preys furthest 
from his hole. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1629 in the Sermons of T. Adams.
Friday’s child is loving and giving  Chil-
dren born on a Friday are supposed to 
have an affectionate, generous nature: My 
mother tells me that my cantankerous, miserly 
uncle was born on Good Friday, which disproves 
the saying “Friday’s child is loving and giving.” 
The proverb is the fi fth line of a traditional 
rhyme beginning “Monday’s child is fair of 
face.” See entries at the days of the week 
for other proverbs from this rhyme.
a friend in need is a friend indeed  True 
friends are those who stand by you in 
times of hardship: “You came to my side 
when I was in trouble. . . . A friend in 
need is a friend indeed” (Charles Reade, 
Griffi th Gaunt, 1866). First recorded in 
this form in 1678, the proverb is of 
ancient origin: compare Euripides (fi fth 
century b.c.), “in adversity good friends 
are most clearly seen” and Ennius (c. 
239–169 b.c.), “a sure friend is known in 
unsure times.”
a friend to all is a friend to none  A per-
son who tries to be friends with everyone 
will end up being friends with no one. 
96
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in 1623 in Wodroephe’s Spares Houres, 
but is of much older origin and is usually 
attributed to Aristotle.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t be all things to all men.
from nothing, nothing is made  See 
nothing comes of nothing.
from shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves is only 
three generations  A family may pass 
from poverty to wealth in one genera-
tion, through effort and enterprise, but 
return from wealth to poverty in the next 
generation, through extravagance or bad 
management: The youngest child of poor 
parents, he taught himself to read and write 
and built up a thriving manufacturing business, 
which has just gone bankrupt in the hands of 
his son—yet another illustration of the proverb 
“From shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves is only three 
generations.” The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
in its variant form, in 1871, and is said to 
have originated in Lancashire, an industrial 
county of England. Its current form has 
also been attributed to the U.S. industrial-
ist Andrew Carnegie (1835–1919).
Variant of this proverb: from clogs to 
clogs is only three generations.
from the day you were born till you ride 
in a hearse, there’s nothing so bad but it 
might have been worse  See nothing 
so bad but it might have been worse.
from the mouths of babes come words 
of wisdom  See out of the mouths 
of babes and sucklings come great 
truths.
from the sublime to the ridiculous is 
only one step  Somebody or something 
that commands great respect or admira-
tion can very quickly become the object 
of scorn or derision: “They also raised 
such foolish questions as, whether God 
might not have become an ass or a cucum-
ber as well as a man, and what effect the 
sacrament would have upon a dog or a 
mouse. From reverence to profanity, as 
from the sublime to the ridiculous, there 
is only one step” (Philip Schaff, History 
of the Christian Church, 1883–1893). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1795 in Tom 
Paine’s The Age of Reason: “The sublime 
and the ridiculous are often so nearly 
related that it is diffi cult to class them 
separately. One step above the sublime 
makes the ridiculous; and one step above 
the ridiculous makes the sublime again.” 
In its current more concise form, the 
proverb is usually attributed to Napoleon 
Bonaparte, referring to his retreat from 
Moscow in 1812. It has given rise to the 
cliché from the sublime to the ridiculous, used 
with reference to any sudden transition or 
sharp contrast between the grand and the 
contemptible.
Variant of this proverb: from the 
sublime to the ridiculous is but a step.
from the sweetest wine, the tartest vine-
gar  Great love may turn to the intense 
hatred; also used of other changes of feel-
ing or nature from one extreme to the 
other: She loved him blindly and passionately 
for a time, but from the sweetest wine comes the 
tartest vinegar, and now she swears she would 
dance on his grave. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1578.
Variant of this proverb: the sweetest 
wine makes the sharpest vinegar.
full cup, steady hand  Those who enjoy 
great power, wealth, or happiness must 
from nothing, nothing is made
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   96 1/29/07   5:12:32 PM
97
behave with caution to avoid losing what 
they have: “Poor things! They were so 
happy—so open-hearted. I did long to cau-
tion them. ‘Full cup, steady hand’” (Char-
lotte M. Yonge, The Monthly Packet, 1889). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1025.
Variant of this proverb: a full cup 
needs a steady hand.
the future ain’t what it used to be  In 
modern times people are less optimistic 
than they were in the past; also used more 
generally when making adverse compari-
sons with the past: I remember leaving col-
lege full of expectations and ambition, but my 
daughter has a far more downbeat—and per-
haps more realistic—view of her prospects. As 
they say, “The future ain’t what it used to be.” 
The proverb is of uncertain origin, having 
been attributed to the baseball player Yogi 
Berra (1925–  ) and the writer Arthur 
C. Clarke (1917–  ), among others.
 the future ain’t what it used to be