98
gambling is getting nothing for some-
thing  Gambling is not a wise use of 
money, as you are very likely to receive 
no return whatsoever for your fi nancial 
outlay: The saying “Gambling is getting 
nothing for something” may be disproved 
by a few lucky winners, but its truth is 
acknowledged by the majority of the popula-
tion—who carry on squandering their money 
on lottery tickets regardless. The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
the game is not worth the candle  It 
is not worth persisting in an enterprise 
that is unlikely to yield enough profi t or 
benefi t to compensate for the effort or 
expense involved, or that carries a risk 
of actual harm or loss: “‘Your brain may, 
as you say, be roused and excited, but 
it is a pathological and morbid process 
which involves increased tissue-change 
and may at least leave a permanent 
weakness. . . . Surely the game is hardly 
worth the candle. Why should you, for 
a mere passing pleasure, risk the loss of 
those great powers with which you have 
been endowed?’” (Sir Arthur Conan 
Doyle, The Sign of Four, 1890). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in the writings of 
the French essayist Michel de Montaigne 
(1533–92).
garbage in, garbage out  A person or 
machine provided with inferior source 
material, faulty instructions, or erroneous 
information can produce only poor-qual-
ity work or rubbish: The poor quality of 
the teaching at the school is refl ected in the 
examination results, which are way below the 
national average. As they say in computing, 
“Garbage in, garbage out.” First recorded in 
1964, the proverb originally referred to 
computer input and output, and is still 
used in that context, often in the form of 
the acronym GIGO.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t make a silk purse out of a 
sow’s ear.
gasoline and whiskey don’t mix  See 
whiskey and gasoline don’t mix.
gather ye rosebuds while ye may  Live 
life to the full while you are still young 
enough to enjoy it: My friends thought I 
was crazy to give up my job and sell my home 
to join the round-the-world voyage, but my 
motto is “Gather ye rosebuds while ye may.” 
The current form of the proverb comes 
from Robert Herrick’s poem “To the 
Virgins, to Make Much of Time” (1648), 
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin. In 1578 the French poet Pierre 
de Ronsard wrote, “Gather the roses of 
g
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   98 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
99
life today,” and Edmund Spenser’s The 
Faerie Queene (1590) contains the lines, 
“Gather therefore the Rose, whilst yet is 
prime,/For soon comes age, that will her 
pride defl ower.”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomor-
row we die; seize the day.
genius is an infi nite capacity for taking 
pains  What appears to be a product 
of superior intellectual power is often 
simply the result of great assiduity and 
meticulous attention to detail: “Finally, 
he examined with his glass the word 
upon the wall, going over every letter of 
it with the most minute exactness. This 
done, he appeared to be satisfi ed, for 
he replaced his tape and his glass in his 
pocket. ‘They say that genius is an infi nite 
capacity for taking pains,’ he remarked 
with a smile. ‘It’s a very bad defi nition, 
but it does apply to detective work’” (Sir 
Arthur Conan Doyle, A Study in Scarlet, 
1887). The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in 1858, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin. 
The comte de Buffon (1707–88) is said to 
have remarked, “Le génie n’est qu’une plus 
grande aptitude à la patience [Genius is only 
a greater aptitude for patience].”
genius is one percent inspiration and 
ninety-nine percent perspiration  Great 
achievements or innovations require some 
intellectual input but are largely due to 
hard work: She received numerous awards for 
her work, and was hailed as one of the great-
est minds of her generation, but in newspaper 
interviews she always remained modest, quoting 
the proverb “Genius is one percent inspira-
tion and ninety-nine percent perspiration.” 
The proverb is traditionally attributed 
to the U.S. inventor Thomas Alva Edison 
(1847–1931).
Variant of this proverb: genius is ten 
percent inspiration and ninety percent 
perspiration.
genius without education is like silver in 
the mine  Superior intellectual power is 
a wasted resource unless it is nurtured by 
education: The school was set up to feed the 
minds of exceptionally gifted students, on the 
principle that genius without education is like 
silver in the mine.
a gentleman’s word is his bond  See a 
man’s word is as good as his bond.
gently does it  See easy does it.
give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it 
to death  People who suddenly acquire 
wealth or power are likely to misuse it: 
Give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it to 
death—within six months he had squandered 
all his winnings, and had to go cap in hand 
to his former employer to ask for his old job 
back. The proverb was fi rst recorded, with 
different wording, in 1576. It occurs in 
Shakespeare’s play Henry VI, Part 3 (1:4): 
“Unless the adage must be verifi ed,/
That beggars mounted run their horse 
to death.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
set a beggar on horseback, and he’ll 
ride to the devil.
give a civil answer to a civil question 
See a civil question deserves a civil 
answer.
give a dog a bad name and hang him 
Once somebody’s reputation has been 
damaged—for example, by rumor or 
 give a dog a bad name and hang him
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   99 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
100
slander—it will never recover: “The Lib-
eral impulse is almost always to give a 
dog a bad name and hang him: that is, 
to denounce the menaced proprietors 
as enemies of mankind, and ruin them 
in a transport of virtuous indignation” 
(George Bernard Shaw, The Intelligent 
Woman’s Guide to Socialism, 1928). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, in 1706.
Variant of this proverb: he that has an 
ill name is half hanged.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: he that would hang his dog gives 
out first that he is mad; throw dirt 
enough, and some will stick.
give a loaf and beg a slice  People who 
are too generous risk having to beg them-
selves: Her generosity was such that it was a 
case of give a loaf and beg a slice herself. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1678 by 
John Ray in A Collection of English Proverbs. 
Sometimes found with slice replaced by 
101
the archaic word shive, meaning the same 
thing.
give a man a fi sh and you feed him for 
a day; show him how to fi sh and you 
feed him for a lifetime  Many of the 
problems of the needy are better solved 
by education than by charitable handouts: 
Our organization believes in the principle that 
if you give a man a fi sh, you feed him for a day, 
whereas if you show him how to fi sh, you feed 
him for a lifetime. In projects all over the Third 
World, our volunteers are actively involved in 
teaching local people the skills they need to 
farm their land more effi ciently. The proverb 
is of ancient Chinese origin.
give a man an inch and he’ll take a 
mile  People are inclined to take exces-
sive advantage of the tolerance or gener-
osity of others; often used to warn against 
making even the smallest concession: He 
came to us once for an evening meal and now 
he expects us to put up his wife and children 
for three weeks! Talk about giving him an inch 
and he’ll take a mile! The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546 in the form “When I 
gave you an inch you took an ell.” An ell 
is an obsolete measure of length, vary-
ing according to locality: in England it is 
approximately 45 inches, in Scotland, 37 
inches.
Variants of this proverb: give a man 
an inch and he’ll take an ell; an inch is as 
good as a mile.
give a man enough rope and he’ll hang 
himself  People who are given complete 
freedom of action will ultimately bring 
about their own downfall, for example by 
inadvertently revealing their guilt: Rather 
than accuse her without any fi rm evidence, I 
suggest we let things take their course. Give a 
man enough rope and he’ll hang himself—
sooner or later we’ll catch her red-handed. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 in 
Thomas Fuller’s Holy War.
give and take is fair play  Exchanging 
like for like—whether it be a blow, an 
insult, a favor, or a pardon—is a fair and 
legitimate way to proceed: “Give and take 
is fair play. All I say is, let it be a fair stand-
up fi ght” (Captain Marryat, Newton Forster, 
1832). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1778, in Fanny Burney’s novel Evelina, 
in the form “Give and Take is fair in all 
nations.” It is also used with give and take 
in the sense of “mutual concession or 
compromise.” 
give a thing, and take a thing, to wear 
the devil’s gold ring  It is wrong to 
take back a gift: He subsequently regretted 
his generosity, and asked his sister to return the 
CD. “Give a thing, and take a thing, to wear the 
devil’s gold ring,” came her reply. Mainly used 
by children, the proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1571, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
ancient origin. Compare Plato (c. 428–348 
b.c.), “as with children, there is no taking 
away of what has been rightly given.”
give credit where credit is due  Do not 
neglect to give people the praise they 
deserve, or to acknowledge the good 
things they do; often used when such 
credit is given grudgingly: “Yes, yes! let us 
be tenderly conscientious in giving credit 
where credit is due; let us never for-
get that the citizen Maurice contributed 
something to the cure of the interesting 
invalid, as well as the victuals and drink 
from the Piebald Horse” (Wilkie Collins, 
After Dark, 1856). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1777, in the form “May honor 
 give credit where credit is due
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   101 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
102
be given to whom honor may be due.” It 
may be of biblical origin: “Render there-
fore to all their dues . . . honour to whom 
honour” (Romans 13:7). The word credit 
replaced honor in the 19th century.
give me a child for the fi rst seven years 
and he is mine for life  A child’s future 
is determined by what it learns in its fi rst 
seven years: The emperor watched the child 
leave and murmured to his secretary “give me 
a child for the fi rst seven years and he is mine 
for life.” The proverb was recorded in 
1902–04 by V. S. Lean in Collecteana but is 
much older, being particularly associated 
with Saint Ignatius Loyola, the founder of 
the Jesuits in the 16th century.
Variant of this proverb: give me a 
child for the fi rst seven years, and you may 
do what you like with him afterwards.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the child is the father of the man.
give the devil his due  People deserve 
recognition for their skills and contribu-
tions even if they are otherwise unworthy 
or unlikable: I can’t stand the man, on a 
purely personal level, but—give the devil his 
due—he has done a fantastic job in getting the 
company back on its feet. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1589 in John Lyly’s Pappe 
with an Hatchet.
the glass is either half empty or half 
full  Many situations can be viewed neg-
atively or positively—a negative thinker 
with half a glass of beer would say that 
the glass was half empty, whereas a posi-
tive thinker would say it was half full: 
Some employees equate redundancy with being 
thrown on the scrap heap, others see it as a 
golden opportunity for a change of career—the 
glass is either half empty or half full.
Variant of this proverb: the opti-
mist’s cup is half full; the pessimist’s cup 
is half empty.
gluttony kills more than the sword 
Overeating, or overindulgence in the 
wrong kind of food, may lead to an early 
death: Whenever he was offered a second help-
ing, my grandfather would shake his head and 
say, “Gluttony kills more than the sword.” I was 
often tempted to ask him how many people 
actually died by the sword in this day and age. 
The proverb dates from before 1384 in 
John Wycliffe’s Works.
go abroad and you’ll hear news of 
home  People often remain ignorant 
of matters concerning their family and 
friends, or events in their own neighbor-
hood, until they go traveling, when they 
hear about them at second hand: “What is 
the meaning of this silly story that people 
are circulating about Thomasin and Mr. 
Wildeve? . . . It is said that one should 
go abroad to hear news of home, and I 
appear to have done it” (Thomas Hardy, 
Return of the Native, 1878). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in 1678.
God fi ts the back to the burden  See 
god makes the back to the burden.
God helps those who help them-
selves  Those who are self-reliant and 
make an effort are more likely to get 
what they want than those who sit back 
and wait for divine assistance: “I wish 
you all success, Paul, and I thank you 
for wishing me to share in your good 
fortune. God helps those who help them-
selves, and he will help you if you only 
deserve it” (Horatio Alger, Paul Prescott’s 
give me a child for the fi rst seven years and he is mine for life
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   102 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
103
Charge, 1865). The proverb is of ancient 
origin. It is sometimes used facetiously 
as a justifi cation for stealing, or in the 
extended form “God helps those who 
help themselves, but God help those who 
are caught helping themselves.”
Variants of this proverb: God helps 
them that help themselves; heaven helps 
those who help themselves.
God is always on the side of the big 
battalions  See providence is always 
on the side of the big battalions.
God is in the details  See the devil is in 
the details.
God made the country and man made 
the town  The urban environment, con-
structed by human hands, is inferior to 
the natural countryside, which is the 
work of divine creation: “The miserable 
routinists who keep repeating invidiously 
Cowper’s ‘God made the country and 
man made the town,’ as if the town were 
a place to kill out the race in, do not know 
what they are talking about” (Oliver Wen-
dell Holmes, Elsie Venner, 1861). In its 
current form, the proverb comes from 
William Cowper’s poem The Task (1785). 
The sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
ancient origin: in the fi rst century b.c. the 
Roman scholar Varro wrote, “divina natura 
dedit agros, ars humana aedifi cavit urbes 
[divine nature gave us the fi elds, human 
art built the cities].”
God makes the back to the burden  No-
body has to endure more than his or her 
body or spirit can bear; used to imply that 
the strongest are destined to suffer the 
greatest adversity, or that at times of great 
adversity we are given extra strength: She 
certainly seems to have had more than her fair 
share of grief in recent years—more than most 
of us could stand—but God makes the back to 
the burden, as they say. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1822.
Variant of this proverb: God fi ts the 
back to the burden.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
god tempers the wind to the shorn 
lamb.
God moves in mysterious ways  Strange 
or unpleasant things that happen are meant 
to be, and often turn out for the best: 
God moves in a mysterious way, and Jenkins’s 
knee injury, which everybody thought would 
spell disaster for the team, had the opposite 
effect—his replacement scored a record number 
of goals, giving the team its best season ever. 
The proverb comes from William Cow-
per’s hymn “Light Shining Out of Dark-
ness” (1779): “God moves in a mysterious 
way/His wonders to perform;/He plants 
his footsteps in the sea/And rides upon 
the storm.”
Variant of this proverb: the Lord 
moves in mysterious ways.
God never sends mouths but he sends 
meat  God can be relied upon to pro-
vide for everybody: “God never sends 
mouths . . . but he sends meat, and any 
man who has sense enough to be honest, 
will never want wit to know how to live” 
(John Pendleton Kennedy, Swallow Barn, 
1832). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1546.
Variant of this proverb: God never 
sends a mouth but he feeds it.
God protect me from my friends—I can 
protect myself from my enemies  See 
save us from our friends.
 God protect me from my friends—I can protect myself from my enemies
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   103 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
104
God sends meat, but the devil sends 
cooks  Good food can be ruined by a 
bad cook: The brochure for the hotel boasted 
that only the best local produce was used in 
its kitchens, but our fi rst meal there was a big 
disappointment. “God sends meat, but the devil 
sends cooks,” remarked my wife. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1542 (A. Borde, 
Dietary of Health), but with the implication 
that it was already in general use.
God’s in his heaven; all’s right with the 
world  All is well at this moment in time; 
used as a general expression of happiness 
or contentment: “Let us then resolutely 
turn our backs on the once-born and 
their sky-blue optimistic gospel; let us not 
simply cry out, in spite of all appearances, 
‘Hurrah for the Universe!—God’s in his 
Heaven, all’s right with the world’” (Wil-
liam James, Varieties of Religious Experience, 
1902). In its current form, the proverb 
comes from Robert Browning’s poem 
“Pippa Passes” (1841). It replaces an ear-
lier proverb, “God is where he was,” fi rst 
recorded in 1530 and used to console or 
encourage those in trouble or despair.
the gods send nuts to those who have no 
teeth  Opportunities or good fortune 
often come too late in life for people to 
enjoy them or take full advantage of them; 
also applied more generally to people of 
any age who are unable to use or benefi t 
from good things that come their way: The 
gods send nuts to those who have no teeth—if 
only I had won a holiday like this while I was 
still young and fi t enough to make the most of 
it! The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1929 
in the periodical American Speech.
God takes soonest those he loves best 
God’s favorites die young, because he 
longs to have them by his side again; 
often said in consolation, for example to 
bereaved parents: God takes soonest those he 
loves best, and little Bethany, who brought such 
happiness to so many people in the fi ve short 
years of her life, lost her battle with leukemia 
yesterday.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: whom the gods love die young; 
the good die young.
God tempers the wind to the shorn 
lamb  Weak or vulnerable people have 
divine protection from the worst mis-
fortunes; also used when such people are 
treated with compassion by their fellow 
human beings: “There is an unduly opti-
mistic proverb which declares that God 
tempers the wind to the shorn lamb. My 
subsequent history was hardly to justify 
such naive faith in the Deity” (Vera Brit-
tain, Testament of Youth, 1933). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1594 in the French 
form “Dieu mesure le froid à la brebis tondue 
[God measures the cold to the shorn 
sheep].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
god makes the back to the burden.
go farther and fare worse  If you reject 
something acceptable in the hope of fi nd-
ing something better, you may end up 
having to settle for something worse: 
“She’s just as rich as most of the girls who 
came out of India. I might go farther and 
fare worse” (William Makepeace Thac-
keray, Vanity Fair, 1848). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546.
go hunting where the ducks are  If you 
want to fi nd or accomplish something, 
you must go to the right places, make 
contact with the right people, and do the 
God sends meat, but the devil sends cooks
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   104 1/29/07   5:12:34 PM
105
right things: “The cold facts of 1988 do 
suggest that if in 1992 the Democrats—in 
Barry Goldwater’s phrase—are to ‘go 
hunting where the ducks are,’ the most 
ducks are likely to be found outside of 
Dixie” (New York Times, 1991).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
fish where the fish are.
the golden age was never the present 
age  The past and the future always seem 
infi nitely preferable to the present time: 
People have fond memories of the past and 
great hopes for the future, forgetting that today 
is yesterday’s future and tomorrow’s past—the 
golden age was never the present age. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1732 in 
Thomas Fuller’s Gnomologia: Adagies and 
Proverbs.
a golden key can open any door  With 
money you can gain access to anything 
you want; used specifi cally of bribery, or 
more generally of the power and infl u-
ence of wealth: “Their better-educated 
neighbours . . . did not call on the newly 
rich family. That was before the days when 
a golden key could open any door” (Flora 
Thompson, Lark Rise to Candleford, 1945). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1580, 
in John Lyly’s Euphues and his England: 
“Who is so ignorant that knoweth not, 
gold be a key for every locke.”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
a bribe will enter without knock-
ing; money is power; money talks.
gold may be bought too dear  Wealth 
is not worth having if there is too great 
a risk or sacrifi ce involved in acquiring 
it: Gold may be bought too dear, and in his 
ruthless pursuit of fi nancial gain he has lost 
most of his friends, destroyed his marriage, 
and damaged his health. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in John Heywood’s 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
good Americans, when they die, go to 
Paris  Paris is regarded as a kind of 
paradise by certain Americans, especially 
the literati, many of whom have taken 
up residence there over the years: If it 
is true that good Americans, when they die, 
go to Paris, then they must not expect to have 
the city to themselves—the French capital has 
become a mecca for tourists from all nations. 
The proverb was coined by the poet and 
artist Thomas Gold Appleton (1812–84) 
and recorded in Oliver Wendell Holmes’s 
The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table (1858). 
It occurs in Oscar Wilde’s play A Woman 
of No Importance (1894), followed by the 
observation that “when bad Americans die 
. . . they go to America.”
a good beginning is half the battle  If 
you make a good start to a project or 
enterprise, you are halfway to making a 
success of it: We were very pleased to have 
made such excellent progress on the fi rst day—a 
good beginning is half the battle. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in Oliver Goldsmith’s 
play She Stoops to Conquer (1773) in the 
form “The fi rst blow is half the battle.” 
The sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
much earlier origin. In modern times it is 
most frequently encountered in the form 
of the cliché half the battle.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
well begun is half done.
a good beginning makes a good ending 
Something that is well planned and well 
executed from the start is likely to end 
in success: A good beginning makes a good 
ending, and if you don’t measure out the 
 a good beginning makes a good ending
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   105 1/29/07   5:12:34 PM
106
ingredients accurately your loaf may be a 
disaster. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1300.
good company on the road is the short-
est cut  A journey seems much shorter 
when you have pleasant people to talk to 
along the way: My friends went with me to 
the station, and what is usually a long and 
tedious walk seemed to be over in no time at 
all. As they say, “Good company on the road 
is the shortest cut.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1653, in Izaak Walton’s The 
Compleat Angler.
Variant of this proverb: cheerful 
company shortens the miles.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
he travels fastest who travels alone.
the good die young  It often seems that 
good people are more likely to meet a pre-
mature death than bad people; also used 
to console those who have lost a young 
friend or relative: “The good do die young. 
That’s why people like you and me are left 
to grow old” (James Leasor, Love and the 
Land Beyond, 1979). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1697 in Daniel Defoe’s Char-
acter of the Late Dr. S. Annesley: “The best of 
men cannot suspend their fate;/The good 
die early, and the bad die late.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
whom the gods love die young.
a good dog deserves a good bone  A 
loyal servant or employee deserves his 
reward: “A good dog deserves, sir, a good 
bone” (Ben Jonson, A Tale of a Tub, 1633). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1611 
by Randle Cotgrave in A Dictionary of the 
French and English Tongues.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the laborer is worthy of his hire.
a good example is the best sermon  It 
is better to show people how to behave 
by setting a good example instead of just 
telling them: The priest was famous locally 
for his active role in the community and clearly 
believed that a good example was the best 
sermon. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1732 by Thomas Fuller in Gnomologia.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
example is better than precept.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: do as i say, not as i do.
a good face is a letter of recommen-
dation  An honest demeanor may be 
interpreted as a sign of a person’s integ-
rity: “His honest countenance was a good 
letter of recommendation” (Tobias Smol-
lett, Humphrey Clinker, 1771). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English in 1620 by T. 
Shelton in his translation of Don Quixote, 
but is much older and appeared in the 
writings of Publius Syrus.
good fences make good neighbors  A 
good relationship between neighbors 
depends on each respecting the other’s 
privacy and not entering his or her prop-
erty uninvited; also used more broadly 
of international relations and the need 
to maintain trade barriers and border 
controls: The saying “Good fences make good 
neighbors” is equally relevant in the work-
place, and you should make every effort not to 
encroach on a colleague’s personal space. First 
recorded in 1640, in the form “A good 
fence helps to keep peace between neigh-
bors,” the proverb is often associated with 
Robert Frost, who used it in his poem 
“Mending Wall” (1914).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a hedge between keeps friendship 
green.
good company on the road is the shortest cut
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   106 1/29/07   5:12:34 PM
107
good health is more to be desired than 
wealth  See health is wealth.
a good horse cannot be of a bad color 
Superfi cial appearances do not affect 
the essential worth of something: “It is 
observed by some, that there is no good 
horse of a bad colour” (Isaac Walton, The 
Compleat Angler, 1653). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1628 by J. Carmichaell in 
Proverbs in Scots.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: appearances are deceiving; judge 
not according to appearances.
a good husband makes a good wife  A 
husband who treats his family with respect, 
and carries out his duties as he should, 
will fi nd that his wife does likewise: He 
complains if his shirts aren’t ironed, or if the 
dinner’s late, but when I ask him to do some-
thing around the house he always manages to put 
it off. I told him, “A good husband makes a good 
wife.” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1492 in Salomon & Marcolphus.
Variant of this proverb: a bad hus-
band makes a bad wife.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good jack makes a good jill.
the good is the enemy of the best  If 
you are content with producing what is 
merely good you will never achieve excel-
lence: In this company we believe that the 
good is the enemy of the best—our products are 
not just of an acceptable standard, they are of 
the highest possible quality. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1912, but with the impli-
cation that it was already in general use.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth 
doing well.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
the best is the enemy of the good.
a good Jack makes a good Jill  People 
who live or work together should set a 
good example to each other—a good 
husband will have a good wife, a good 
master will have a good servant, and so 
on: You cannot expect your secretary to be 
punctual if you are regularly late for work—a 
good Jack makes a good Jill. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1623 in William Painter’s 
Palace of Pleasure.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good husband makes a good wife.
a good leader is also a good follower 
Those best suited to leadership are those 
who have shown a willingness to follow 
the commands of others: Before you cast 
your vote, remember that a good leader is also 
a good follower, and consider the way that 
the candidates have behaved in their previous 
roles. The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that cannot obey cannot com-
mand.
good men are scarce  It is often diffi cult 
to fi nd a talented or suitably qualifi ed 
person when you need one; also used 
literally as a comment on the dearth of 
decent people—or eligible bachelors in 
the modern world: He’s an excellent worker, 
and we’re anxious not to lose him—good men 
are scarce. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1609 in D. Tuvill’s Essays Moral and 
Theological.
Variant of this proverb: a good man 
is hard to fi nd.
a good name is better than precious 
ointment  Your good name should be 
your most cherished possession: “Let 
me tell you something straight from the 
 a good name is better than precious ointment
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   107 1/29/07   5:12:34 PM
108
shoulder: good name in man or woman 
is the immediate jewel of their soul. A 
good name is better than precious oint-
ment” (Joseph Heller, God Knows, 1984). 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “A good 
name is better than precious ointment; 
and the day of death than the day of one’s 
birth” (Ecclesiastes 7:1). The words pre-
cious ointment are sometimes replaced by 
precious stones, fi ne jewels, rubies, great riches, 
or gold.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good reputation is more valuable 
than money.
a good name is sooner lost than won  It 
takes a lot of time and effort to earn a 
good name for yourself, but you can lose it 
in an instant with a single foolish act: Think 
carefully before you get involved in anything 
that is not strictly legal—remember that a good 
name is sooner lost than won. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1727 in John Gay’s 
“Fox at Point of Death,” in Fables.
a good reputation is more valuable than 
money  A good reputation is worth more 
than anything else: It is reassuring to learn 
that are still a few incorruptible individuals 
in public offi ce, who are aware that a good 
reputation is more valuable than money. The 
proverb is of ancient origin, and has been 
traced back to the writings of Publilius 
Syrus (fi rst century b.c.).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good name is better than precious 
ointment.
good riddance to bad rubbish  We are 
better off without worthless people or 
things; usually said on the departure of 
such a person or the loss of such a thing: 
“‘I have been in this house waiting on 
my young lady a dozen year and I won’t 
stop in it one hour under notice from a 
person owning to the name of Pipchin 
trust me, Mrs P.’ ‘A good riddance of bad 
rubbish!’ said that wrathful old lady. ‘Get 
along with you, or I’ll have you carried 
out!’” (Charles Dickens, Dombey and Son, 
1847–48). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1771 in Essex Gazette.
the good seaman is known in bad weather 
Those who are truly able or skillful prove 
their worth at times of crisis or when 
major problems are encountered; also 
used literally with specifi c application to 
sailing: She seems competent enough, but she 
has not yet been put to the test—a good sea-
man is known in bad weather. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1767 in Papers of 
Benjamin Franklin.
good seed makes a good crop  The 
quality of a product depends on the qual-
ity of the raw materials or ingredients: 
“Seed-time’s pretty sure to come around 
. . . And good seed makes a good crop” 
(Laura Ingalls Wilder, The Long Winter, 
1940). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1569 in the form “Of good seed proceeds 
good corn,” with reference to parents and 
their offspring.
a good tale is not the worse for being 
told twice  There is no harm in telling a 
good joke or anecdote—or a story with a 
moral—a second time; often used by way 
of apology or justifi cation for such repeti-
tion: You may have heard this story before, but 
a good tale is not the worse for being told twice. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1577 in 
the form “A good tale may be twice told.” 
In the 18th century it was used when grace 
was accidentally said twice before a meal.
a good name is sooner lost than won
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   108 1/29/07   5:12:34 PM
109
the good that men do lives after 
them  People are remembered after 
their deaths for the good things that they 
did during their lives: He was a tyrannical 
ruler, and had many innocent people put to 
death, but he was also a great patron of the arts, 
and the good that men do lives after them—he 
has gone down in history as one of the founders 
of modern civilization. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1942, but the sen-
timent it expresses is found in the writings 
of Euripides (fi fth century b.c.): “When 
good men die their goodness does not 
perish,/But lives though they are gone.” 
The opposite sentiment is expressed in 
Shakespeare’s play Julius Caesar (3:2), “The 
evil that men do lives after them, /The 
good is oft interred with their bones.”
good things come in small packages 
See the best things come in small 
packages.
good to forgive, best to forget  See for-
give and forget.
good wine needs no bush  A good prod-
uct does not need advertising: In the com-
petitive marketplace of the modern world, few 
companies are prepared to trust the wisdom of 
the age-old proverb, “Good wine needs no bush.” 
Of ancient origin, the proverb occurs in 
the epilogue of Shakespeare’s play As You 
Like It: “If it be true that good wine needs 
no bush, ’tis true that a good play needs 
no epilogue.” The word bush refers to a 
bunch of ivy that was formerly hung out-
side a wine merchant’s premises.
a goose quill is more dangerous than a 
lion’s claw  Written words of criticism 
or defamation can do more harm or cause 
more pain than a physical attack: The color 
drained from her face as she read the letter, 
with its vile accusations, and she collapsed 
before she reached the end—a goose quill is 
indeed more dangerous than a lion’s claw.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the pen is mightier than the sword.
gossip is the lifeblood of society  Social 
intercourse thrives on gossip—if people 
stopped talking about each other they might 
stop talking to each other: Gossip is the life-
blood of society—how dull our parties would be 
if we were driven to discussing politics or sport all 
the time. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1941 in David Kent’s Jason Burr’s First Case.
gossip is vice enjoyed vicariously  Peo-
ple feel they can innocently participate 
in the illicit pleasures of other people’s 
immoral behavior by talking about it 
with their friends or reading about it in 
the newspaper: They say that gossip is vice 
enjoyed vicariously, and women who would 
never dream of being unfaithful to their hus-
bands always seem eager to hear about those 
who are. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1904 in E. Hubbard, The Philistine.
governments have long arms  See kings 
have long arms.
grace will last, beauty will blast  A good 
character will outlive superfi cial physical 
attractiveness: She may be the more beautiful 
of the two sisters, but remember how the old 
adage goes, “grace will last, beauty will blast.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1450 in 
Proverbis of Wysdom.
Variant of this proverb: grace will 
last, favor will blast.
grasp no more than the hand will 
hold  Do not be greedy or  overambitious: 
 grasp no more than the hand will hold
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   109 1/29/07   5:12:35 PM
110
People who ignore the proverb “Grasp no more 
than the hand will hold” often end up losing 
everything they have in an attempt to gain 
just a little more. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1732 in Thomas Fuller’s Gno-
mologia: Adagies and Proverbs.
the grass is always greener on the other 
side of the fence  A different place, situ-
ation, job, or lifestyle always seems more 
attractive or appealing than your own: She 
is one of those people for whom the grass is always 
greener on the other side of the fence, and who are 
never satisfi ed with what they have if they think 
their friends have something better. In its cur-
rent form the proverb is of relatively recent 
origin, but the sentiment it expresses dates 
back to ancient times. Compare Ovid (43 
b.c.–a.d. 18): “fertilior seges est alienis semper 
in agris [the harvest is always more fruitful 
in another man’s fi elds].”
Variant of this proverb: the grass is 
always greener in somebody else’s back-
yard.
the gray mare is the better horse  A 
woman is often more competent or pow-
erful than a man; used specifi cally of 
wives who have the upper hand over their 
husbands: “She did not wish it to seem, 
to quote an old fashioned expression, 
that the grey mare was the better horse. 
. . . She strove to avoid prejudicing her 
husband’s position” (Violet Powell, Flora 
Annie Steel, 1981). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1529.
great boats may venture more, but little 
boats should keep near shore  See lit-
tle boats should stay close to shore.
a great book is a great evil  A long book 
is a bad book—good writers know how 
to express themselves concisely: “If there 
is any truth in the old Greek maxim that a 
large book is a great evil, English diction-
aries have been steadily growing worse 
ever since their inception more than three 
centuries ago” (Oxford English Dictionary, 
Preface, 1933). The proverb originated 
in the writings of the poet Callimachus 
(third century b.c.).
a great city, a great solitude  People 
often feel more lonely in a large city, among 
thousands of strangers, than they would 
do if they were actually alone: It was on the 
crowded streets of Los Angeles that I learned the 
meaning of the proverb “A great city, a great soli-
tude,” and I longed to be back in my cozy apart-
ment, with just the television for company. The 
proverb is of ancient Greek origin.
great cry but little wool  See much cry 
and little wool.
the greater the truth, the greater the 
libel  Some people will take greater 
offense at a true accusation of wrong-
doing than at a false one: The vehemence 
with which he denied any involvement in the 
scandal aroused my suspicions—the greater 
the truth, the greater the libel. The proverb 
is associated with the English judge Lord 
Mansfi eld (1705–93).
great men have great faults  Remarkable 
people tend to have serious character fl aws: 
“Great men’s faults are never small” (John 
Clarke, Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina, 1639). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1616 by 
T. Draxe in his Bibliotheca Scholastica.
great minds think alike  People often say 
or do the same thing, or make the same 
decision, coincidentally; said when such a 
the grass is always greener on the other side of the fence
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   110 1/29/07   5:12:35 PM
111
coincidence occurs, with no more than a 
jocular reference to the size of the intel-
lect: “I was planning to buy them an espresso 
machine.” “So was I. Great minds think alike!” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1618. In 
early occurrences it had the form “Great 
minds [or wits] jump,” the word jump being 
used in the now archaic sense of “agree.”
Variant of this proverb: great minds 
run in the same channels.
great oaks from little acorns grow 
Things of great size or importance may 
develop from a relatively small or insig-
nifi cant beginning: “A curfew, I admit, 
is not the end of civilization, nor even 
a steep imposition. But mighty oaks, as 
they say, from little acorns grow” (Wash-
ington Times, 1995). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1385, in Chaucer’s Troilus 
and Criseyde. The word great is sometimes 
replaced by big, mighty, tall, or some other 
synonym.
great trees keep down little ones  The 
predominance of a particular person, 
company, nation, etc., results in lesser 
rivals being kept in the shade: In the 
112
competitive world of politics it is a sad but 
unavoidable fact that great trees keep down 
little ones. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1642 by Thomas Fuller in The Holy State 
and the Profane State.
a green winter makes a fat churchyard 
More deaths occur during mild winters 
than they do in cold winters: Scientists 
agree that “a green winter makes a fat church-
yard,” as milder winters encourage the develop-
ment of a variety of epidemics. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1635 by J. Swan in 
Speculum Mundi.
Variant of this proverb: a green Yule 
makes a fat churchyard.
a growing youth has a wolf in his 
stomach  Adolescent boys are perpetu-
ally hungry: I’d better fi ll up the freezer—a 
growing youth has a wolf in his stomach, and 
my teenage son has invited three of his friends 
for the weekend! The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1611 in Randle Cotgrave’s A 
Dictionary of the French and English Tongues.
Variant of this proverb: A growing 
youth has a wolf in his belly.
a guilty conscience needs no accuser 
People who know they have done wrong 
reveal their guilt by the things they say 
or the way they interpret what other 
people say: “Then I knew he was speaking 
of Hinckman’s murder and must be the 
murderer—‘a guilty conscience needs no 
accuser.’” (Ellery Queen’s Mystery Magazine, 
1952). The proverb was fi rst recorded in its 
current form in 1744, but a similar senti-
ment was expressed in a proverb recorded 
by Dionysius Cato (fourth century a.d.): 
“the man with something on his conscience 
thinks he is always the subject of talk.”
a green winter makes a fat churchyard