113
the habit does not make the monk  See 
the cowl does not make the monk.
the hair of the dog is good for the 
bite  See take a hair of the dog that 
bit you.
half a loaf is better than no bread  We 
must be grateful for what we get, even 
if it is less than we desire—it is better to 
have a small amount than nothing at all: I 
was disappointed not to fi nd all the information 
I required, but half a loaf is better than no bread, 
and at least I have enough to start writing my 
article. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1546.
Variants of this proverb: half a loaf is 
better than none; half an egg is better than 
an empty shell. 
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
something is better than nothing.
the half is better than the whole  A 
restrained approach to something is often 
the most effective; used to warn against 
excess: “It is true of conversation as of many 
other things, that the half is better than the 
whole. People who are fond of talking 
ought to beware of being lengthy” (A. C. 
Benson, From a College Window, 1906). The 
proverb comes from the Greek poet Hes-
iod’s Works and Days (eighth century b.c.) 
“The half is greater than the whole.” It was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1550.
Variant of this proverb: half is more 
than the whole.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
less is more.
half the truth is often a whole lie  Not 
telling the whole truth, or saying something 
that is only partly true, is tantamount to 
lying: What she said was not entirely untrue, but 
she omitted to mention a number of signifi cant 
details, and half the truth is often a whole lie. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in Benjamin 
Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack (1758) in 
the form “Half the truth is often a great lie.” 
It occurs in Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s poem 
The Grandmother (1847): That a lie which is 
half a truth is ever the blackest of lies,/That 
a lie which is all a lie may be met and fought 
with outright,/ But a lie which is part a 
truth is a harder matter to fi ght.”
Variant of this proverb: a half-truth is 
often a great lie.
half the world knows not how the other 
half lives  See one half of the world 
doesn’t know how the other half 
lives.
handsome is as handsome does  People 
should be valued for their good deeds, 
h
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   113 1/29/07   5:12:35 PM
114
not their good looks; also occasionally 
used of things, or as a warning not to be 
misled by an attractive appearance: “‘Such 
a handsome young man.’ ‘Handsome is as 
handsome does. Much too fond of poking 
fun at people’” (Agatha Christie, A Murder 
Is Announced, 1950). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1659, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of much earlier 
origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the tree is known by its fruit.
the hand that rocks the cradle rules the 
world  Mothers have a powerful infl u-
ence—if indirectly—on world affairs, 
because it is they who mold the char-
acters of future leaders: “The habits of 
the home in one generation become the 
morals of society in the next. As the 
old adage says: ‘The hand that rocks the 
cradle rules the world’” (Washington Times, 
1996). The proverb comes from William 
Ross Wallace’s poem “What Rules the 
World” (1865).
hanging and wiving go by destiny  Some 
people are fated to marry each other, just 
as some are fated to be hanged: Hanging 
and wiving go by destiny, and if I am meant to 
have him, then he will be mine! The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1546, and occurs in 
Shakespeare’s play The Merchant of Venice 
(2:9): “The ancient saying is no heresy:/
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
marriages are made in heaven.
happy is he that is happy in his children 
Parents derive much pleasure from their 
children, if they happen to be happy and 
well-behaved: The bishop patted the infant 
on the head and murmured wistfully “happy 
is he that is happy in his children.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1732 in 
Thomas Fuller’s Gnomologia.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: children are certain cares, but 
uncertain comforts.
happy is the bride that the sun shines 
on  According to popular superstition, a 
woman who has a sunny wedding day will 
have a happy marriage: “Monday came, a 
cloudless lovely day . . . the clerk ascend-
ing the church steps, quoted the old 
proverb to the pew-opener, meeting him 
under the porch: ‘Happy is the bride on 
whom the sun shines!’” (Wilkie Collins, 
No Name, 1862). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in Robert Herrick’s Hesperides 
(1648) in the form “Blest is the Bride, on 
whom the Sun doth shine.”
Variants of this proverb: blessed is the 
bride that the sun shines on; happy is- 
the bride that the sun shines on, blessed is 
the corpse that the rain falls on; happy 
is the bride that the sun shines on, sorry 
is-the bride that the rain rains on.
happy is the country that has no history 
It is a happy or fortunate country that 
has no unpleasant events worth record-
ing in its past: “Quoting the familiar 
dictum: ‘Happy is the country which has 
no history,’ I remarked that I belonged 
. . . to a generation which was still on 
the early side of middle age but had 
already seen almost more history than 
any generation could bear” (Vera Brittain, 
Testament of Experience, 1957). The proverb 
has been attributed to the French philoso-
pher Montesquieu (1689–1755) in the 
form “Happy the people whose annals are 
blank in history-books!” A similar senti-
ment occurs in Benjamin Franklin’s Poor 
the hand that rocks the cradle rules the world
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   114 1/29/07   5:12:35 PM
115
Richard’s Almanack (1740): “Happy that 
nation, fortunate that age, whose history 
is not diverting.”
happy’s the wooing that’s not long a-
doing  It is best to have only a short 
period of courtship before marriage: Hap-
py’s the wooing that’s not long a-doing, says the 
proverb, but many couples who marry in haste 
soon discover that it is not a recipe for wedded 
bliss. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1576 in Parade of Devil’s Devices.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: marry in haste, repent at leisure.
hard cases make bad law  Cases that are 
complex or diffi cult to decide often cause 
the true meaning of the law to be distorted 
or obscured and sometimes lead to what 
is perceived as a miscarriage of justice: 
The saying “Hard cases make bad law” should 
never be used to vindicate incompetent members 
of the legal profession. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1854 by G. Hayes in W. S. 
Holdsworth’s History of English Law (1926).
the harder the storm, the sooner it’s 
over  See the sharper the storm, the 
sooner it’s over.
hard words break no bones  Adverse 
criticism or verbal abuse may be unpleas-
ant, but it does no physical harm: She 
called me every name under the sun, and told 
me never to go near any member of her family 
again, but hard words break no bones. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1697 in G. 
Meriton’s Yorkshire Ale.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
sticks and stones may break my bones, 
but words will never hurt me.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
the tongue is not steel, but it cuts.
hard work never hurt anybody  See 
work never hurt anybody.
haste is from the devil  Never be 
tempted to act in haste—you are bound 
to regret it: “Listening patiently to the 
views . . . he knew that for an Intelligence 
offi cer ‘haste is from the devil’” (Lon-
don Times, 1929). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1633, and may have origi-
nated in Eastern Europe or Asia.
haste makes waste  By acting too hast-
ily or doing things too hurriedly you risk 
causing damage or making mistakes that 
subsequently have to be put right, result-
ing in a loss of time, money, and materi-
als: Haste makes waste—I broke at least four 
of the glasses in my rush to get them washed 
and dried before the guests started arriving. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1546 by John Heywood in his 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: haste makes 
waste, and waste makes want, and want 
makes strife between a good man and 
his wife.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the hasty bitch bringeth forth blind 
whelps.
the hasty bitch bringeth forth blind 
whelps  Things done in haste tend to 
produce poor results: The foreman had 
forgotten the age-old warning that “the hasty 
bitch bringeth forth blind whelps.” The prov-
erb appeared in R. Robinson’s 1556 trans-
lation of Thomas More’s Utopia but is of 
much older origin, being quoted by Livy, 
Aristotle, and Galen. The word whelps 
may sometimes be replaced by puppies.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
haste makes waste.
 the hasty bitch bringeth forth blind whelps
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   115 1/29/07   5:12:36 PM
116
hasty climbers have sudden falls  Un-
duly rapid progress in a person’s career, 
or in some other sphere of activity, often 
leads to an abrupt and ignominious down-
fall or failure: The speed with which he rose 
through the ranks caused his parents some 
concern, for hasty climbers have sudden falls. 
The proverb dates from before 1439 in J. 
Lydgate’s Fall of Princes.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a fool’s bolt is soon shot.
hawks will not pick out hawks’ eyes 
People who belong to the same group will 
not—or should not—harm one another: 
“I have heard that hawks should not pick 
out hawks’ eyes. What do you propose to 
gain?” (John Buchan, Salute to Adventurers, 
1915). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1573 in the form “One crow never pulls 
out another’s eyes.”
Variant of this proverb: a crow 
doesn’t pick out the eye of another crow.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: dog does not eat dog; there’s 
honor among thieves.
heads I win, tails you lose  In some 
situations it is impossible for one person 
not to be a winner—or impossible for 
another person not to be a loser—what-
ever the outcome: It’s heads I win, tails you 
lose—if they keep me on they’ll have to start 
paying me the going rate, and if they don’t, I’ll 
sue them for wrongful dismissal. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1846 by John Wilson 
Croker in The Croker Papers.
health is not valued till sickness 
comes  People often fail to appreci-
ate the good situation that they are in 
until circumstances change for the worse: 
Health is not valued till sickness comes—he 
took his home comforts for granted until his 
family’s fortunes changed, and he found himself 
begging on the streets. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1553 in the form “Health 
after sickness is sweeter evermore.”
health is wealth  Good health is a valu-
able asset, worth more than any amount 
of money: Remember that health is wealth, 
and there’s no point in working yourself into an 
early grave just so that you can afford a better 
house or a bigger car. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in the 16th century.
Variant of this proverb: good health 
is more to be desired than wealth.
hear all, see all, say nowt  It is sometimes 
prudent to listen and watch carefully, but 
say nothing: She remembered her grandmoth-
er’s advice to hear all, see all, say nowt. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1400 in 
Proverbs of Wisdom. A fuller version of the 
proverb runs “hear all, see all, say nowt, 
tak’ all, keep all, gie nowt, and if tha ever 
does owt for nowt do it for thysen.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
keep your mouth shut and your eyes 
open.
heated arguments do not warm the fi re-
side  See the only thing a heated 
argument ever produced is coolness.
heaven helps those who help them-
selves  See god helps those who help 
themselves.
heaven protects children, sailors, and 
drunken men  Certain types of people 
seem to enjoy divine protection; said 
when a child, sailor, or other person has 
a miraculous escape from injury or death: 
“Heaven, they say, protects children, sail-
hasty climbers have sudden falls
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   116 1/29/07   5:12:36 PM
117
ors, and drunken men; and whatever 
answers to Heaven in the academical sys-
tem protects freshmen” (Thomas Hughes, 
Tom Brown at Oxford, 1861). The quotation 
is the fi rst recorded use of the proverb.
a heavy purse makes a light heart  Those 
who have plenty of money are happy and 
carefree: If only I could sell another of my 
paintings, all our troubles would be over—a 
heavy purse makes a light heart. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1521 in A. Barclay’s 
Eclogues.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a light purse makes a heavy heart.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: money can’t buy happiness; much 
coin, much care.
he comes too early who brings bad 
news  People are never in a hurry to 
hear bad news: I knew they would be less 
pleased to see me when they heard what I had 
to say to them—he comes too early who brings 
bad news.
Variant of this proverb: bad news 
always comes too soon.
a hedge between keeps friendship 
green  It is advisable not to become 
too intimate with friends or neighbors, 
and to respect each other’s privacy, if you 
want to maintain a good relationship with 
them: We meet up for coffee once a month, 
and phone each other now and then, but most 
of the time we just get on with living our own 
lives—a hedge between keeps friendship green. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1707 in 
John Mapletoft’s Select Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: a hedge 
between keeps fellowship green.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
good fences make good neighbors.
he gives twice who gives quickly  A 
prompt response to a request for some-
thing, such as money or help, is of greater 
value than a more generous offering 
given late: “‘He gives twice who gives 
quickly.’ . . . We have everything to gain 
by generous action at once” (London Times, 
1980). Of ancient origin, the proverb is 
sometimes quoted in its Latin form, “Bis 
dat qui cito dat.” Other words, such as 
promptly or happily, may be substituted 
for quickly.
he laughs best who laughs last  See he 
who laughs last, laughs longest.
he lives long who lives well  Provided 
that you live a good life, its actual length 
is of no signifi cance, whereas a bad life is 
worthless and wasted; also interpreted 
literally, with the implication that living 
well will extend your life span: “He liveth 
long who liveth well!/All other life is short 
and vain” (Horatio Bonar, Hymns of Faith 
and Hope, 1861). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1553 in the form “They lived 
long enough, that have lived well enough.”
Variant of this proverb: he lives lon-
gest who lives best.
hell hath no fury like a woman 
scorned  A woman who is rejected by 
the man she loves has an immense capac-
ity for ferocious or malicious revenge: 
Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned—he 
arrived home from his so-called business trip 
to fi nd that his jealous wife had burned all his 
books, poured his vintage wine over the garden, 
smashed his computer, and emptied their joint 
account to buy herself a new wardrobe and a 
one-way ticket to her sister’s in England. In 
its current form, the proverb comes from 
William Congreve’s play The Mourning 
 hell hath no fury like a woman scorned
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   117 1/29/07   5:12:36 PM
118
Bride (1697): “Heav’n has no rage, like 
love to hatred turn’d;/Nor Hell a fury, 
like a woman scorn’d.” The sentiment it 
expresses, however, is of ancient origin: 
compare Euripides (fi fth century b.c.), “a 
woman . . . when she has been wronged 
in a matter of sex, there is no other 
heart more bloodthirsty.” The proverb 
is also applied to other situations where 
somebody—not necessarily a woman—is 
treated with disrespect or contempt, as 
in “Hell hath no fury like a rock star 
scorned.”
Variant of this proverb: hell knows 
no wrath like a woman scorned.
hell is full of good meanings, but heaven 
is full of good works  See the road to 
hell is paved with good intentions.
help you to salt, help you to sorrow 
According to popular superstition, it is 
unlucky to add salt to another person’s 
food at table: “No one would at table 
spoon salt on to another person’s plate, 
for ‘Help you to salt, help you to sor-
row’” (Flora Thompson, Lark Rise to Can-
dleford, 1945). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection.
he must have a long spoon who sups 
with the devil  See he who sups with 
the devil should have a long spoon.
he that cannot obey cannot command 
Those who are unwilling or unable to 
obey orders are not fi t to hold a position 
of leadership or authority: His insubordi-
nate behavior made him an unlikely candidate 
for promotion—his superiors were fi rmly of the 
belief that he who cannot obey cannot com-
mand. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1734, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin. Compare 
Seneca (c. 4 b.c.–a.d. 65), “nemo regere 
potest nisi qui et regi [nobody can rule 
unless he can also be ruled].”
Variant of this proverb: by learning to 
obey, you will know how to command.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good leader is also a good fol-
lower.
he that complies against his will is of 
his own opinion still  By forcing some-
body to do something, or to admit that 
something is true, you have not actually 
succeeded in changing that person’s mind: 
They tried to brainwash me into believing that 
terrorism was the only possible course of action, 
and I knew that my life depended on at least 
pretending to agree with them, but he that com-
plies against his will is of his own opinion still. 
The proverb comes from Samuel Butler’s 
poem Hudibras (1680): “He that complies 
against his will,/Is of his own opinion 
still;/Which he may adhere to, yet dis-
own,/For reasons to himself best known.”
he that drinks beer, thinks beer  Drink-
ing alcohol affects the way you think and 
the way you behave; often used with spe-
cifi c reference to the effects of drinking 
beer as opposed to other alcoholic liquor: 
He that drinks beer, thinks beer, and by the end 
of the fi fth pint our conversation had begun 
to deteriorate accordingly. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1820 in W. Irving’s Sketch 
Book of Geoffrey Crayon.
he that goes a-borrowing, goes a-
sorrowing  Borrowing inevitably leads 
to trouble, as when you fi nd yourself 
unable to repay a loan; also used to 
hell is full of good meanings, but heaven is full of good works
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   118 1/29/07   5:12:36 PM
119
imply that those who try to borrow 
from others will be disappointed: “Who 
goes a-borrowing goes a-sorrowing. Yes, 
the balanced-budget amendment is sort 
of a dumb idea, because it can so eas-
ily be evaded by cunning congressional 
accounting” (American Spectator, 1995). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1545, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: borrowing 
brings sorrowing.
he that has a choice has trouble  Mak-
ing a choice is fraught with diffi cul-
ties—not only do you risk making the 
wrong decision, but you may also offend 
somebody by what you reject: The saying 
“He that has a choice has trouble” is never more 
true than when you are faced with two equally 
undesirable alternatives.
he that has a full purse never wanted 
a friend  Wealthy people never lack 
friends—or those who claim to be their 
friends until their money runs out: I 
soon discovered that he who has a full purse 
never wanted a friend, and there were plenty 
of people who were only too anxious to help 
me, once they knew that they would be amply 
rewarded for their efforts.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a rich man’s joke is always funny; 
wealth makes many friends.
he that has an ill name is half hanged 
See give a dog a bad name and hang 
him.
he that has a wife and children has given 
hostages to fortune  Family responsi-
bilities can hold a man back in life, for 
example by discouraging him from taking 
risks: It was a tempting opportunity, and one 
that I would have seized with both hands in 
my bachelor days, but he that has a wife and 
children has given hostages to fortune—if the 
venture failed, all our lives would be ruined. In 
its current form, the proverb comes from 
Francis Bacon’s essay “Of Marriage and 
Single Life” (1612): “He that hath wife and 
children hath given hostages to fortune; 
for they are impediments to great enter-
prises, either of virtue or mischief.” A 
similar sentiment, however, occurs in the 
writings of the Roman poet Lucan (a.d. 
39–65): “Coniunx est mihi, sunt nati: dedimus 
tot pignora fatis [I have a wife, I have sons: 
all of them hostages given to fate].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he travels fastest that travels alone.
he that is born to be hanged shall 
never be drowned  See if you’re born 
to be hanged, then you’ll never be 
drowned.
he that is down need fear no fall  Those 
in lowly positions, or who have already 
fallen from lofty positions, have no need 
to worry about failure: I had already lost 
everything I valued—my job, my marriage, 
my self-respect—so I was prepared to take the 
risk. He that is down need fear no fall. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in Richard 
Taverner’s Proverbs (1539).
he that is too secure is not safe  Beware 
of complacency—you must remain alert 
and watchful if you want to avoid danger: 
The old proverb “He that is too secure is not safe” 
has been quoted by critics of the modern trend 
toward increasingly sophisticated home-security 
systems and car-safety devices. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1732, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin.
 he that is too secure is not safe
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   119 1/29/07   5:12:36 PM
120
Variant of this proverb: the way to be 
safe is never to feel secure.
he that lives in hope dances to an ill 
tune  It is unwise to let your future 
happiness or well-being depend on 
expectations that may not be realized: 
She talked excitedly of the bright prospects 
that lay ahead of her if she passed the audi-
tion, but he that lives in hope dances to an ill 
tune, and I was afraid that she was heading 
for a major disappointment. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1591, in John 
Florio’s Second Fruits, in the form “He 
that dooth liue in hope, dooth dance in 
narrowe scope.”
Variant of this proverb: he that lives 
in hope dances without music.
he that lives on hope will die fasting  Do 
not pin all your hopes on something you 
may not attain, because you could end up 
with nothing: It’s no good just hoping that 
business will improve—he that lives on hope 
will die fasting, and you must take action now, 
by going out and fi nding some new customers. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1616 in 
the form “Hope will make a man neither 
eat nor drink.”
Variant of this proverb: he that lives 
on hope has a slender diet.
he that repairs not a part, builds all  See 
who repairs not his gutters repairs his 
whole house.
he that touches pitch shall be defi led  If 
you get involved with wicked people 
or illegal activities, you cannot avoid 
becoming corrupted yourself: I would 
advise you to steer clear of these people and 
their dubious affairs, if you want to maintain 
your spotless reputation—he that touches 
pitch shall be defi led. The proverb comes 
from the Apocrypha: “He that toucheth 
pitch shall be defi led therewith” (Eccle-
siasticus 13:1).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you lie down with dogs, you’ll get 
up with fleas.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the sun loses nothing by shining 
into a puddle.
he that waits for dead men’s shoes may 
go a long time barefoot  See it’s ill 
waiting for dead men’s shoes.
he that will not when he may, when he 
will he may have nay  Take advantage 
of an opportunity when it presents itself, 
even if you do not want or need it at the 
time, because it may no longer be available 
when you do: “‘It was a rather pretty little 
box, just the kind of thing you like. . . .’ 
‘I know,’ I said. ‘If you will not when you 
may, when you will you shall have nay’” 
(Barbara Pym, A Glass of Blessings, 1958). 
The proverb dates from before 1000: W. 
W. Skeat quotes Anglo-Saxon Homily in his 
Early English Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opportunity knocks but once.
he that will thrive must fi rst ask his 
wife  A married man’s fi nancial situation, 
his success or failure in business, and the 
like often depend on the behavior and dis-
position of his wife: “He that would thrive, 
must ask his wife. It was lucky for me that 
I had one as much dispos’d to industry and 
frugality as myself ” (Benjamin Franklin, 
Autobiography, 1790). The proverb dates 
from before 1500: Songs and Carols (c. 
1470) has: “Fore he that cast hym for to 
thryve, he must ask off his wiffe leve.”
he that lives in hope dances to an ill tune
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   120 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
121
he that would eat the fruit must climb 
the tree  Nothing is achieved without 
effort: It takes many years of study and 
training to become a brain surgeon—there 
is no easy way. He that would eat the fruit 
must climb the tree. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1721 in James Kelly’s Scottish 
Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: he that would 
eat the kernel must crack the nut.
he that would go to sea for pleasure 
would go to hell for a pastime  A sailor’s 
life can be so unpleasant and dangerous, it 
seems that those who choose spend their 
leisure hours at sea must be either mas-
ochistic or insane: “‘What made you come 
to sea anyway?’ ‘Search me. . . . To amuse 
myself, I suppose.’ ‘Well, a man who’d go 
to sea for fun’d go to hell for a pastime’” 
(Malcolm Lowry, Ultramarine, 1933). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1899 in A. 
J. Boyd’s Shellback.
he that would hang his dog gives out fi rst 
that he is mad  Those who are planning 
some action that might attract criticism 
fi rst seek to justify it in advance: The prime 
minister’s attack on his underling suggests that 
he plans a reshuffl e in the near future, for we 
all know that he that would hang his dog gives 
out fi rst that he is mad. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1530 in J. Palsgrave’s 
L’Éclaircissement de la langue française.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
give a dog a bad name and hang him.
he that would have eggs must endure the 
cackling of hens  You must be prepared 
to put up with something unpleasant or 
annoying in order to get what you want; 
also used of an undesirable aspect or 
drawback that accompanies something 
you like or enjoy: I hate my job at the burger 
bar—the hours are long, the customers are 
rude, and the pay is lousy—but I need to go on 
working there if I want to save enough money 
to go on vacation. As my mother always says, he 
that would have eggs must endure the cackling 
of hens. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1659.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the cat would eat fish, but would 
not wet her feet; you have to take 
the rough with the smooth.
he that would learn to pray, let him go 
to sea  Sailors face many dangers and 
life-threatening experiences at sea: We 
ran into what was later described as one of the 
worst storms in living memory, and the proverb 
“He that would learn to pray, let him go to 
sea” never seemed more appropriate than in 
the fi fteen terrifying hours that followed. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1640 in George Herbert’s Outlandish 
Proverbs, but the sentiment it expresses is 
of earlier origin.
he that would the daughter win, must 
with the mother fi rst begin  If you want 
to win the affections of a young woman, 
or persuade her to marry you, it is 
important to make a favorable impression 
on her mother: Her mother likes you, and 
that’s half the battle—mothers have a way of 
infl uencing their daughters’ choices, directly or 
indirectly. As the saying goes, “He that would 
the daughter win, must with the mother fi rst 
begin.” The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in 1578 in Courtly 
Controversy.
he travels fastest who travels 
alone  Those who go through life without 
the encumbrance of family responsibilities 
 he travels fastest who travels alone
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   121 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
122
make the best progress; also used more 
literally of companions on a journey: “The 
reason I can ‘do what I do’ is because 
I’ve never married. He travels fastest who 
travels alone, and that goes double for she” 
(Florence King, Refl ections in a Jaundiced Eye, 
1989). The proverb comes from Rudyard 
Kipling’s poem The Winners (1888): “Down 
to Gehenna or up to the Throne,/He trav-
els the fastest who travels alone.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that has a wife and children has 
given hostages to fortune.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: good company on the road is the 
shortest cut.
he who begins many things, fi nishes but 
few  Do not try to work on too many 
different projects at the same time, or 
you will end up achieving nothing: His 
life’s work consists of three great novels, and 
more than a hundred plot summaries for books 
that were never written—he who begins many 
things, fi nishes but few. The proverb’s fi rst 
use is recorded in Giovanni Torriano’s A 
Common Place of Italian Proverbs and Prover-
bial Phrases (1666).
he who chases two hares catches nei-
ther  See if you run after two hares, 
you will catch neither.
he who dances must pay the fi ddler  See 
they that dance must pay the fiddler.
he who does not work, neither should 
he eat  Idle people do not deserve to 
receive charitable handouts—everybody 
should earn his or her own living: “Con-
servatives like to cite that ancient Puritan 
teaching: ‘He who does not work, neither 
should he eat.’ But the fl ip side of that 
stern motto should be written in the 
social contract too: ‘He who does work, 
does deserve a decent break’” (Barbara 
Ehrenreich, Time, 1991). The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “Neither did we eat 
any man’s bread for nought; but wrought 
with labour and travail night and day. . . . 
For even when we were with you, this 
we commanded you, that if any would 
not work, neither should he eat” (2 Thes-
salonians 3:8–10). It is sometimes quoted 
in its more succinct Latin form, “Qui non 
laborat non manducet.”
Variant of this proverb: if you won’t 
work, you shan’t eat.
he who excuses himself accuses him-
self  By making an apology for some-
thing, or trying to justify it, or even 
denying it, you are actually making a 
confession of guilt: “The tests would be 
underground, every precaution taken, 
impossible to contaminate anything. One 
had heard these pleas before. . . . Who 
excuses himself accuses himself ” (Geof-
frey Wagner, Elegy for Corsica, 1968). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1611. It is 
sometimes quoted in its French form, 
“Qui s’excuse, s’accuse.”
Variant of this proverb: who excuses 
himself accuses himself.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: accusing the times is but excusing 
ourselves; never ask pardon before 
you are accused.
he who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day  It is wiser to with-
draw from a situation that you cannot 
win than to go on fi ghting and lose—by 
a strategic retreat you can return to the 
battle or argument with renewed energy 
at a later date: I conceded defeat at that point, 
he who begins many things, fi nishes but few
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   122 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
123
on the basis that he who fi ghts and runs away 
may live to fi ght another day, but I have every 
intention of mounting a fresh challenge as soon 
as I have gathered enough evidence to be sure 
of success. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1542, but the sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient origin: the Greek poet and 
dramatist Menander (c. 342–292 b.c.) 
wrote, “A man who fl ees will fi ght again.” 
It has given rise to the fi gurative phrase to 
live to fi ght another day.
Variant of this proverb: he who fi ghts 
and runs away may live to fi ght another 
day, but he that is in battle slain will never 
rise to fi ght again.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
discretion is the better part of valor; 
a live dog is better than a dead lion.
he who has a mind to beat a dog will 
easily fi nd a stick  See it’s easy to find 
a stick to beat a dog.
he who has a tiger by the tail dare not 
let go  See he who rides a tiger is 
afraid to dismount.
he who hesitates is lost  Do not be too 
slow to make a decision or take advantage 
of an opportunity: You don’t have forever to 
make up your mind—he who hesitates is lost, 
and if you don’t put in an offer for the house 
soon, somebody else will buy it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1713 in the form 
“The woman that deliberates is lost” in 
Joseph Addison’s Cato.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
delays are dangerous.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: look before you leap.
he who is absent is always in the 
wrong  It is easy to accuse or attack 
those who are not present to defend 
themselves or their rights or arguments: 
“I will quote fi rst that fi ne old French 
saying—which covers any claim Charlie 
may or may not have on that cake—‘he 
who is absent is always in the wrong’” 
(Anthony Price, Soldier No More, 1981). 
The French saying referred to in this 
quotation is “Les absents ont toujours tort.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in Eng-
lish in 1640 in the form “The absent 
party is still faulty.”
Variants of this proverb: the absent 
are always in the wrong; the absent are 
never without fault nor the present with-
out excuse.
he who is good at making excuses is sel-
dom good at anything else  Worthless 
or incapable people are constantly making 
excuses to cover up for their shortcom-
ings: They always have a plausible explanation 
for their failure to deliver, but I put it down to 
sheer incompetence—he who is good at making 
excuses is seldom good at anything else.
he who laughs last, laughs longest  Mi-
nor successes or failures along the way 
are of no signifi cance—the person who 
is ultimately triumphant is the only real 
winner; often used when somebody turns 
the tables with a fi nal act of retaliation: 
Their celebrations are somewhat premature—I 
still have one more trick up my sleeve, and he 
who laughs last, laughs longest. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1607 in the form 
“Hee laugheth best that laugheth to the 
end” (The Christmas Prince). Facetious vari-
ants include “He who laughs last didn’t 
get the point anyway” and “He who laughs 
last is probably an Englishman.” The prov-
erb has given rise to the fi gurative phrase 
to have the last laugh.
 he who laughs last, laughs longest
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   123 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
124
Variants of this proverb: he who 
laughs last, laughs best; he laughs best 
who laughs last.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let them laugh that win.
he who lives by the sword dies by the 
sword  Those who engage in aggression 
or violence will meet their death in a simi-
lar way. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“Put up again thy sword into his place: for 
all they that take the sword shall perish with 
the sword” (Matthew 26:52). Other words 
may be substituted for sword, as in the fol-
lowing quotations: “When you live by the 
gun you die by the gun” (Washington Post, 
1997) and “Live by the torch, die by the 
torch” (Stephen King, The Stand, 1978).
Variants of this proverb: he who lives 
by the sword shall perish by the sword; 
live by the sword, die by the sword.
he who never made a mistake never 
made anything  See if you don’t make 
mistakes you don’t make anything.
he who pays the piper calls the tune  The 
person who pays for a service or fi nances 
a project has the right to say how it should 
be done: The kitchen layout that our custom-
ers had specifi ed did not—in our professional 
opinion—make best use of the space, but he 
that pays the piper calls the tune, so we gave 
them what they wanted. First recorded 
in 1779 in Diary of Grace Galloway, the 
proverb has given rise to the fi gurative 
phrase to call the tune, meaning “to be in 
control.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
whose bread i eat, his song i sing.
he who rides a tiger is afraid to dis-
mount  When you are in a dangerous 
situation, or have embarked on a danger-
ous course of action, it is often safer to 
continue than to try to stop or withdraw: 
I knew that what I was doing was illegal, but he 
who rides a tiger is afraid to dismount, and the 
possible consequences of pulling out of the deal 
at this late stage didn’t bear thinking about. 
Of Chinese origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1875 in W. Scar-
borough’s Collection of Chinese Proverbs.
Variants of this proverb: he who rides 
the tiger can never dismount; He who has 
a tiger by the tail dare not let go.
he who sups with the devil should have 
a long spoon  Those who have dealings 
with wicked, dangerous, or dishonest 
people should remain on their guard and 
try not to become too intimately involved: 
“Hindenburg and the army thought they 
could use [Hitler]. . . . Who sups with 
the devil needs a long spoon” (Evelyn 
Anthony, The Grave of Truth, 1979). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 
1390). It occurs in Shakespeare’s play The 
Comedy of Errors (4:3), “He must have a 
long spoon that must eat with the devil.”
Variant of this proverb: he must have 
a long spoon who sups with the devil.
he who wills the end, wills the means 
Those who are determined to achieve 
something are equally determined to fi nd 
a way of achieving it: Finding his daughter 
in the vast and unfamiliar city seemed an 
impossible task, but somehow he succeeded—he 
who wills the end, wills the means. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1692, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
general use.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
where there’s a will there’s a way.
he who lives by the sword dies by the sword
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   124 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
125
he who would climb the ladder must 
begin at the bottom  You must start 
from a lowly position and rise through the 
ranks if you want to attain a position of 
high status or authority: “I was the lowest 
of the four in rank—but what then?—he 
that climbs a ladder must begin at the 
fi rst round” (Sir Walter Scott, Kenilworth, 
1821). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1710 in S. Palmer’s Moral Essays on some 
of the most Curious and Signifi cant English, 
Scotch and Foreign Proverbs.
he who would wish to thrive, must let 
spiders run alive  See if you want to 
live and thrive, let the spider run 
alive.
he who would write and can’t write can 
surely review  People who become crit-
ics are those who lack the talent to be 
novelists, dramatists, or other kinds of 
artists in their own right; used in response 
to a bad review: Asked to comment on the 
damning criticism of her book in the press, she 
simply shrugged her shoulders and said, “He 
who would write and can’t write can surely 
review.” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1848, in James Russell Lowell’s A Fable 
for Critics. Similar sentiments have been 
expressed by others: in 1870, Benjamin 
Disraeli wrote, “You know who the critics 
are? The men who have failed in literature 
and art.”
the higher the monkey climbs the more 
he shows his tail  People’s faults and 
shortcomings become increasingly obvi-
ous as they advance to positions of high 
offi ce: He was patently unsuited to such a 
responsible post, but was promoted nonetheless, 
and the current debacle in his department is 
proof of the saying that the higher the monkey 
climbs the more he shows his tail. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded, in rather more 
graphic form, as an explanatory note in 
John Wycliffe’s translation of the Bible 
(c. 1395): “the fi lthe of the hynd partis 
of an ape aperith more, whanne he stieth 
[climbs] on high.” In modern usage the 
word ass is sometimes substituted for 
tail.
the higher the tree, the sweeter the 
plum The best fruit is found at the top of 
the tree: The salaries are biggest at the top 
of the ladder; as the saying goes, the higher 
the tree, the sweeter the plum. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1659 in J. Howell’s 
Paroemiographia.
the highest branch is not the safest 
roost  Those in the highest positions of 
power or authority are, in some respects, 
the most vulnerable, because there will 
always be plenty of others eager to take 
their place or cause their downfall: I am 
happy in my work, and have no ambitions for 
further advancement—the highest branch is 
not the safest roost. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in 1563 
in Mirror for Magistrates.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the post of honor is the post of 
danger; uneasy lies the head that 
wears a crown.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: better be first in a village than 
second at rome.
history doesn’t repeat itself—historians 
do  See history repeats itself.
history is a fable agreed upon  History 
represents the traditionally accepted inter-
pretation of what actually happened in the 
 history is a fable agreed upon
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   125 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
126
past: It is said that history is a fable agreed 
upon, but there seems to be a distinct lack of 
agreement among modern historians on some of 
the more controversial issues and events of the 
20th century. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1948 in a U.S. proverb collection.
history repeats itself  Similar events 
tend to recur in different periods of his-
tory—for example, when rulers or gov-
ernments fail to learn from the mistakes 
of those who have gone before; also used 
when some more trivial or personal inci-
dent recurs: “That age has passed away for 
ever. History repeats itself, it is true, but 
history will not bear mimicry” (Augustus 
Jessopp, The Coming of the Friars, 1885). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in George Eliot’s Scenes of Clerical 
Life (1858), but the sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient origin, occurring in the 
writings of the Greek historian Thucy-
dides (fi fth century b.c.). In 1852, in 
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, 
Karl Marx wrote, “Hegel says somewhere 
that all great events and personalities in 
world history reappear in one fashion or 
another. He forgot to add: the fi rst time as 
tragedy, the second as farce.”
Variant of this proverb: history 
doesn’t repeat itself—historians do.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the more things change, the more 
they stay the same.
hitch your wagon to a star  You must be 
ambitious, and aim to achieve the high-
est possible goal; also used as advice to 
cultivate the acquaintance of powerful, 
successful, or infl uential people who can 
help to advance your interests: “Hitch your 
wagon to a star” is one of the unoffi cial mot-
toes of the college, which has a reputation for 
encouraging students of all abilities to fulfi ll 
their potential. The proverb comes from 
Ralph Waldo Emerson’s essay “Civiliza-
tion,” in Society and Solitude (1870).
hoist your sail when the wind is 
fair  Take advantage of favorable condi-
tions or circumstances while they last: 
The market is very volatile, and things could 
change at any moment, so hoist your sail when 
the wind is fair and buy now! The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1583 in Melbancke’s 
Philotimus.
Variant of this proverb: hoist up the 
sail while the gale does last.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: make hay while the sun shines; 
strike while the iron is hot.
the hole calls the thief  Criminals and 
other wrong-doers will go where oppor-
tunity presents itself: The police knew very 
well that the hole calls the thief and that was 
the place to lay their trap. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1640 by George Herbert 
in Outlandish Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opportunity makes a thief.
home is home, be it ever so homely 
However simple or lowly a person’s abode 
may be, it is still his or her home and there-
fore the best place to be: On international 
business trips I’ve stayed in some of the best hotels 
in the world, but I’m always glad to get back to 
my own little apartment—home is home, be it 
ever so homely. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1546 in the form “Home is homely, 
though it be poor in sight.” A similar senti-
ment is expressed in the song “Home, 
Sweet Home” (1823) by J. H. Payne: “Be it 
ever so humble, there’s no place like 
home.”
history repeats itself
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   126 1/29/07   5:12:38 PM
127
Variant of this proverb: home is 
home though it’s never so homely.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: east, west, home’s best; there’s no 
place like home.
home is where the heart is  Home is 
the place where you are happiest, or 
where the people you love are: “They 
entertained several times a year, they 
went out to departmental parties from 
time to time, but these things did not 
interest Sulka much. Home was where 
her heart was” (Colette Dowling, The Cin-
derella Complex, 1981). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1870, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin. Other 
words may be substituted for heart, and a 
facetious variant of the proverb is “Home 
is where the mortgage is.”
home is where you hang your hat  Home 
is the place where you are currently living, 
to which you return at the end of the work-
ing day: People keep asking me if I’m going home 
for Thanksgiving—meaning back to my parent’s 
house in the country. As far as I’m concerned, 
home is where you hang your hat, and for me 
that’s New York City. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1930 in Fletcher’s Green Rope.
Homer sometimes nods  Even the great-
est minds have lapses of attention, leading 
to mistakes; often used as an excuse 
for error: “Scientifi c reason, like Homer, 
sometimes nods” (T. H. Huxley, Nine-
teenth Century, 1887). The proverb origi-
nated in the writings of the Roman poet 
Horace (65–8 b.c.): “Indignor quandoque 
bonus dormitat Homerus [I am indignant 
when the worthy Homer nods].”
Variant of this proverb: even Homer 
sometimes nods.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: nobody is infallible; to err is 
human, to forgive divine.
an honest look covereth many faults  An 
innocent demeanor may hide much guilt: 
No one suspected that such a guileless child 
could have done such a thing, but an honest 
look covereth many faults. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1642 in G. Torriano’s 
Select Italian Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: an honest 
good look covereth many faults.
an honest man’s word is as good as his 
bond  See a man’s word is as good as 
his bond.
honest men marry quickly, wise men not 
at all  Honest men marry without hesita-
tion, seeing no threat in a wife, but wise 
men know better. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded by James Howell in his 1645–55 
publication Epistolae Ho-Elianae: or Familiar 
Letters: “Honest men use to marry, but 
wise men not.”
honesty is more praised than prac-
ticed  Many people say that honesty is 
important, but few are always scrupu-
lously honest themselves: The latest revela-
tions from the White House suggest that the 
saying “Honesty is more praised than practiced” 
is nowhere more applicable than in the world 
of politics.
honesty is the best policy  Being honest 
or telling the truth is always the wisest 
course of action, although it is often not 
the easiest or most attractive option: “I 
am afraid we must make the world honest 
before we can honestly say to our children 
that honesty is the best policy” (Radio 
 honesty is the best policy
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   127 1/29/07   5:12:38 PM
128
address by George Bernard Shaw, 1932). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1605. 
In his Apophthegms (1854), the English 
politician, philosopher, and theologian 
Richard Whately wrote, “Honesty is the 
best policy; but he who is governed by 
that maxim is not an honest man.”
Variant of this proverb: honesty is 
the best policy, though it may not pay the 
largest dividends.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
cheaters never prosper; honesty pays.
honesty pays  You will ultimately reap 
the benefi ts of being honest, although these 
are not always immediately obvious: It took 
a lot of courage to own up to my mistake, but 
honesty pays—if only by relieving the burden 
of guilt that I have been carrying around for the 
past few days. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1876 in W. G. Nash New England Life.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: cheaters never prosper; honesty 
is the best policy.
honey catches more fl ies than vinegar 
See you can catch more flies with 
honey than with vinegar.
honors change manners  People who 
improve their status in society all too 
often become arrogant: “How I have 
offended the Lord of Lindesay I know 
not, unless honours have changed man-
ners” (Walter Scott, The Abbot, 1820). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
c. 1430 by John Lydgate in Chaucer but is 
Roman in origin.
Scottish variant of this proverb: lord-
ships change manners.
the hook without bait catches no fi sh  If 
you want to tempt or persuade people, 
you need to offer them something attrac-
tive as an incentive: The company believes 
that the hook without bait catches no fi sh, and 
the fi rst thousand customers to sign up for a 
loan will enjoy signifi cantly reduced interest 
rates for the fi rst twelve months. The proverb 
is recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
hope and have  If a person wants some-
thing badly enough he or she is likely to 
achieve it: “Hope and have, in time a man 
may gaine any woman” (A. Fraunce in En-
glish Parnassus, 1913). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded 1540 in J. Palsgrave’s Acolastus.
Variant of this proverb: hope well 
and have well.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: hope for the best and prepare for 
the worst.
hope deferred makes the heart sick  De-
lay in getting what you desire, or in learn-
ing whether or not your hopes are to be 
realized, is a cause of great anxiety and 
distress: Hope deferred makes the heart sick, 
and after waiting in vain for promotion for more 
than ten years he fi nally left the army, a bitter 
and disillusioned man. The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Hope deferred maketh the 
heart sick: but when the desire cometh, it 
is a tree of life” (Proverbs 13:12).
hope for the best and prepare for the 
worst  Remain optimistic, but make 
sure that you are mentally or physically 
prepared to cope with failure or disas-
ter: “The youngest of us cannot always 
escape—hoping, trusting, relying on the 
best, we should be prepared for the 
worst” (Edward Howard, Rattlin the Reefer, 
1836). The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in 1565.
honesty pays
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   128 1/29/07   5:12:38 PM
129
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
put your trust in god, and keep your 
powder dry.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: hope and have.
hope is a good breakfast but a bad 
supper  There is no harm in being opti-
mistic at the beginning of something, but 
beware of being left with nothing but 
unrealized expectations at the end: Hope 
is a good breakfast but a bad supper, and when 
darkness forced them to abandon their efforts to 
fi nd the missing child, the morale of the search 
party was at its lowest ebb. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1625 in Francis Bacon’s 
Apophthegms.
hope keeps the heart from breaking  See 
if it were not for hope, the heart 
would break.
hope springs eternal in the human 
breast  It is human nature to remain opti-
mistic—even after a setback, or despite 
evidence to the contrary: “Night after 
night his disappointment is acute, but hope 
springs eternal in the scholastic breast” 
(Charles Dickens, Our Mutual Friend, 
1865). The proverb comes from Alexan-
der Pope’s Essay on Man (1732): “Hope 
springs eternal in the human breast:/Man 
never Is, but always To be blest.” It is often 
shortened to “Hope springs eternal.”
hope well and have well  See hope and 
have.
a horse can’t pull while kicking  People 
engaged in acts of insubordination or 
protest cannot work effi ciently or produc-
tively: There is no room in this organization 
for anybody who refuses to toe the line—a 
horse can’t pull while kicking. The proverb 
is recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
horses for courses  Different people 
have different strengths and talents, and 
each person should be assigned to the 
task or job that is best suited to that par-
ticular individual: “Horses for courses is 
a sound adage in motoring as well as the 
turf, and few British motorists would look 
to Czechoslovakia for their car” (Daily 
Telegraph, 1972). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1891 (A. E. T. Watson, Turf ) 
in a horse-racing context, with the implica-
tion that it was already in frequent use in 
that context.
hot love is soon cold  Passions that arise 
suddenly are liable to subside equally 
quickly: “I hope that such hot love cannot 
be so soone colde” (John Lyly, Euphues: The 
Anatomy of Wit, 1578). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1537 in R. Whitford’s 
Werke for Householders.
an hour in the morning is worth two in 
the evening  People are at their most 
effi cient early in the day, when they are 
refreshed by sleep: When it comes to preparing 
for exams, students would do well to remember the 
saying “An hour in the morning is worth two in 
the evening.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1827 in William Hone’s Every-Day Book.
Variant of this proverb: an hour 
before breakfast is worth two the rest of 
the day.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
lose and hour in the morning, chase 
it all day.
a house divided against itself cannot 
stand  The members of a group must 
 a house divided against itself cannot stand
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   129 1/29/07   5:12:38 PM
130
remain united if the group is to suc-
ceed or survive; sometimes used to warn 
against dissension: “‘A house divided 
against itself cannot stand.’ I believe this 
government cannot endure, permanently 
half slave and half free” (Speech by Abra-
ham Lincoln, 1858). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Every kingdom divided 
against itself is brought to desolation; and 
every city or house divided against itself 
shall not stand” (Matthew 12:25); “If a 
house be divided against itself, that house 
cannot stand” (Mark 3:25).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: divide and conquer; united we 
stand, divided we fall.
the house shows the owner  A person’s 
character is revealed by the state of his or 
her house: The house was disturbingly tidy, 
but, as they say, the house shows the owner. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1611 
by Randle Cotgrave in A Dictionary of the 
French and English Tongues.
a house without books is like a room 
without windows  Books brighten and 
enlighten our daily lives in the same way 
that windows brighten and illuminate 
a room: If it is true that a house without 
books is like a room without windows, then 
my uncle’s house must be the darkest place 
on earth—the only reading matter to be 
found there was on the cans and boxes in 
the pantry!
humble hearts have humble desires  Peo-
ple with timid characters tend to have 
modest ambitions: Humble hearts have hum-
ble desires, but surely no one could be content 
with such meagre rewards. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1640 by George Herbert 
in Outlandish Proverbs.
hunger drives the wolf out of the 
wood  People in dire need are forced 
to do things that would be unwise or 
undesirable in other circumstances: “‘He 
says he doesn’t want anything to eat,’ 
answered Nanon; ‘that’s not good for 
him.’ ‘So much saved,’ retorted her mas-
ter. ‘That’s so,’ she said. ‘Bah! he won’t cry 
long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the 
woods’” (Honoré de Balzac, Eugenie Gran-
det, 1833). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in the late 15th century, but 
there is evidence of a French version in 
the early 14th century.
hunger is the best sauce  Hunger makes 
all food taste good, regardless of its qual-
ity or the way it is served: We were starving 
after our long walk, and nobody complained 
about my cooking that night—hunger is the 
best sauce! The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1530, but the sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient origin. Compare Cicero 
(106–43 b.c.): “cibi condimentum esse famem 
[hunger is the spice of food].”
Variant of this proverb: hunger is the 
best pickle.
hungry bellies have no ears  See a hun-
gry stomach has no ears.
a hungry man is an angry man  Hunger 
makes people angry, often dangerously 
so: The strikers and their families were starv-
ing, and a hungry man is an angry man, so 
we took care not to provoke them. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded c. 1641 in David 
Fergusson’s Scottish Proverbs.
a hungry stomach has no ears  There is 
no point in talking to or reasoning with 
hungry people, or those who are greed-
ily devouring their food: You’re wasting 
the house shows the owner
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   130 1/29/07   5:12:38 PM
131
your breath—these people are starving, and a 
hungry stomach has no ears. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded c. 1770 in W. Hubbard’s 
General History of New England.
Variant of this proverb: hungry bel-
lies have no ears.
hurry no man’s cattle  Do not try to 
make others hurry or rush because you 
are impatient: “I knew that in due time 
he would tell me the result of these 
mental exercises; in the meantime I 
stood by the old adage—hurry no man’s 
cattle” (J. S. Fletcher, Murder of the Ninth 
Baronet, 1932). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1822 in Sir Walter Scott’s 
The Pirate.
Variant of this proverb: don’t rush 
the cattle.
the husband is always the last to 
know  When a wife is unfaithful to her 
husband, he is always the last person 
to fi nd out about it; also used in other 
similar situations: He was devastated to 
learn that his wife was having an affair, 
and even more upset when he discovered that 
most of their friends had known about it for 
months—as they say, the husband is always 
the last to know. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1604. The word wife may be 
substituted for husband, as in Margaret 
Mitchell’s Gone with the Wind (1936): “‘I 
thought surely the whole town knew by 
now. Perhaps they all do, except you. You 
know the old adage: ‘The wife is always 
the last one to fi nd out.’”
Variant of this proverb: the husband 
is always the last to fi nd out.
 the husband is always the last to know