132
an idle brain is the devil’s work-
shop  Those who do not have worth-
while or constructive things to think 
about may turn their minds to mischief 
or crime: “Steady employment . . . keeps 
one out of mischief, for truly an idle 
brain is the devil’s workshop” (Samuel 
Smiles, Self-Help, 1859). The proverb 
dates from before 1602 in W. Perkins’s 
Treatise of Callings.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the devil finds work for idle 
hands to do; idleness is the root of 
all evil.
idleness is the root of all evil  A lack 
of useful things to do is the cause of much 
crime and wrongdoing: “‘The boy will be 
idle there,’ said Miss Murdstone . . . ‘and 
idleness is the root of all evil’” (Charles 
Dickens, David Copperfi eld, 1850). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1422, in the 
form “Idleness is the root of vices,” but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin, 
and has been attributed to Saint Bernard 
(1090–1153). Its current form fi rst occurs 
in George Farquhar’s play The Beaux’ Strata-
gem (1707), and it was probably infl uenced 
by the biblical quotation “the love of money 
is the root of all evil” (1 Timothy 6:10).
Variant of this proverb: idleness is 
the mother of all the vices.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the devil finds work for idle 
hands to do; an idle brain is the 
devil’s workshop.
idle people have the least leisure  Peo-
ple who are naturally disinclined to work 
always claim to be far too busy to do what 
is requested of them; also interpreted 
more literally, with the implication that 
those who are slow and lazy in their work 
have little or no spare time for leisure: 
He sits in his offi ce all day—doing very little, 
as far as we can tell—but when the shop gets 
busy he says he has no time to help. As they say, 
idle people have the least leisure. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1678 in the form 
“Idle folks have the most labor.”
Variant of this proverb: idle people 
lack no excuses.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the busiest men have the most 
leisure.
an idle youth, a needy age  People who 
do not work hard when they are young 
will have nothing set aside for when they 
are old. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1611 in Randle Cotgrave’s A Dictionary of 
the French and English Tongues.
Variant of this proverb: be not idle 
and you shall not be longing.
i
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   132 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
133
if a job’s worth doing, it’s worth doing 
well  See if a thing’s worth doing, 
it’s worth doing well.
if and an spoils many a good charter 
Excellent plans may be doomed to fail-
ure because of the conditions that come 
with them: “Then he came with his If’s 
and And’s” (Samuel Richardson, Clarissa, 
1748). The proverb was recorded, c. 1535, 
by Sir Thomas More: “what quod the pro-
tectour thou servest me I wene with iffes 
and with andes.”
if anything can go wrong, it will  If 
there is the remotest possibility of failure 
or disaster, you can be sure that it will 
happen; often used of a minor detail, 
overlooked in planning, that has a major 
detrimental effect: If anything can go wrong, 
it will—as the bride walked down the hall, 
ready to set off for the church, the dog bounded 
in from the garden, leaped up to greet her, and 
planted its muddy paws on the bodice of her 
snow-white wedding dress. First recorded in 
this form in 1956, the proverb is popu-
larly known as Murphy’s Law, allegedly 
named for the aircraft engineer Captain 
Edward E. Murphy and coined by one of 
his colleagues in 1949. It has a number of 
facetious corollaries—for example, “Of 
the things that can’t go wrong, some will” 
and “If two or more things can go wrong, 
the one that will go wrong fi rst is the one 
that will cause the most damage.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: bread always falls buttered side 
down.
if a pig had wings, it might fl y  Some 
things are not just improbable, but down-
right impossible; said to somebody who 
puts forward such a suggestion: “‘So, 
except for the crew, we’d keep her [the 
submarine] . . .’ ‘Yes, if we could hide her. 
And if a pig had wings, it could fl y’” (Tom 
Clancy, The Hunt for Red October, 1984). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, with dif-
ferent wording, in 1862, by A. Hislop in 
The Proverbs of Scotland.
Variants of this proverb: pigs may fl y, 
but they are very unlikely birds; if frogs 
had wings, they wouldn’t bump their tails 
on rocks.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if ifs and ans were pots and pans, 
there’d be no work for tinkers; if 
wishes were horses, beggars would 
ride; if the sky falls, we shall catch 
larks.
if at fi rst you don’t succeed, try, try 
again  Do not be discouraged by failure, 
and never give up—if you keep trying 
you will ultimately enjoy success: Their 
motto is “If at fi rst you don’t succeed, try, try 
again”—this is their third attempt to break 
the record for nonstop circumnavigation of the 
globe. The proverb comes from a rhyme 
fi rst recorded in Thomas H. Palmer’s 
Teacher’s Manual (1840): “ ’Tis a lesson you 
should heed,/Try, try again./If at fi rst 
you don’t succeed,/Try, try again.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the third time is the charm.
if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth doing 
well  Always make your best effort, and 
do not be content with what is merely 
adequate: “If a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth 
doing well” is certainly Bob’s motto—and 
you’ve never seen such a thorough and meticu-
lous young man. The proverb comes from 
a letter written by Lord Chesterfi eld in 
1746: “In truth, whatever is worth doing 
at all is worth doing well.”
 if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth doing well
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   133 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
134
Variants of this proverb: anything 
worth doing is worth doing well; if a job’s 
worth doing, it’s worth doing well.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the good is the enemy of the best; 
never do things by halves.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the best is the enemy of the 
good.
if every man would sweep his own door-
step, the city would soon be clean  If 
people made an effort to improve their 
own behavior, instead of criticizing other 
people’s, the world would be a better 
place: “It appears to be hard to draw 
a clear distinction between deciding a 
question of right and wrong for one’s self 
and deciding it for others. . . . ‘If every 
man would sweep his own doorstep the 
city would soon be clean’” (London Times, 
1930). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection, but the sentiment it expresses 
is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
sweep your own doorstep clean.
if frogs had wings, they wouldn’t bump 
their tails on rocks  See if a pig had 
wings, it might fly.
if God did not exist, it would be neces-
sary to invent him  People have an innate 
need to believe in a divine creator who 
controls their destinies: Any attempt to abol-
ish religion is doomed to failure—if God did 
not exist, it would be necessary to invent him. In 
its current form, the proverb comes from 
the writings of the French philosopher 
Voltaire (1694–1778): “Si Dieu n’existait 
pas, il faudrait l’inventer.” The sentiment it 
expresses, however, is of ancient origin: 
compare Ovid (43 b.c.–a.d. 18), “Expedit 
esse deos, et, ut expedit, esse putemus [It is 
convenient that there be gods, and, as it is 
convenient, let us believe that there are].” 
In modern usage of the proverb, the name 
of some other indispensable person or 
thing is often substituted for God.
Variant of this proverb: if there were 
no God, it would be necessary to invent 
him.
if ifs and ans were pots and pans, 
there’d be no work for tinkers  We 
must be realistic, and not talk about 
things—however desirable—that are 
unlikely to happen; said to somebody 
who makes a statement prefaced by “if ”: 
“If the weather clears up before lunchtime, and 
if Jack has managed to fi x my car by then, we 
could drive to the coast this afternoon.” “If ifs 
and ans were pots and pans, there’d be no work 
for tinkers.” The word ans (or ands) is an 
archaic word meaning “ifs.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if a pig had wings, it might fly; if 
wishes were horses, beggars would 
ride; if the sky falls, we shall catch 
larks.
if it ain’t broke, don’t fi x it  Do not 
try to improve on something that is 
already working well: “If your version of 
Windows 98 works fi ne and does what 
you want then there is no real reason 
to upgrade. . . . The . . . adage applies: 
If it ain’t broke, don’t fi x it” (Guardian, 
2001). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1977, popularized by Bert Lance, 
director of the Offi ce of Management 
and Budget in President Jimmy Carter’s 
administration.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
leave well enough alone.
if every man would sweep his own doorstep, the city would soon be clean
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   134 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
135
if it looks like a duck, walks like a duck, 
and quacks like a duck, it’s a duck   It 
is usually safe to identify somebody as 
a particular type of person when his or 
her appearance, behavior, and words all 
point to the same conclusion: If it looks 
like a duck, walks like a duck, and quacks like 
a duck, it’s a duck—everything about my son’s 
new girlfriend suggested that she was not the 
innocent, chaste young lady she claimed to be. 
Of U.S. origin, the proverb dates from 
the 1950s and was originally applied to 
suspected communists.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: appearances are deceiving.
if it takes two to make a bargain, it takes 
two to break it  See it takes two to 
make a bargain.
if it were not for hope, the heart would 
break  You must cling to hope when you 
have nothing else, because the alterna-
tive is despair: “No harm in hoping, Jack! 
My uncle says, Were it not for hope, the 
heart would break” (Samuel Richardson, 
Clarissa, 1748). The proverb dates from 
before 1250.
Variant of this proverb: hope keeps 
the heart from breaking.
if one sheep leaps over the ditch, all the 
rest will follow Where one person sets an 
example by doing something risky or dan-
gerous others are likely to follow: “One 
sheep will leap the ditch when another 
goes fi rst” (Walter Scott, Old Mortality, 
1816).
if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch  When ignorant or inex-
perienced people are guided by those no 
more knowledgeable than themselves, 
the result is disaster: The instructors were 
unfamiliar with some of the equipment they 
were training us to use, so accidents seemed 
inevitable—if the blind lead the blind, both 
shall fall into the ditch. The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Let them alone: they 
be blind leaders of the blind. And if 
the blind lead the blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch” (Matthew 15:14). It has 
given rise to the cliché the blind leading 
the blind.
if the cap fi ts, wear it  See if the shoe 
fits, wear it.
if the mountain will not come to Moham-
med, Mohammed must go to the moun-
tain  If you cannot get what you want, 
you must adjust yourself to the circum-
stances or adopt a different approach: 
They ignored our petition, and refused to send 
a representative to our protest meeting, so we 
marched en masse to their headquarters to put 
our case against the proposed development—
if the mountain will not come to Moham-
med, Mohammed must go to the mountain. 
The proverb comes from a story about 
the prophet Mohammed, the founder of 
Islam, related in Francis Bacon’s essay “Of 
Boldnesse” (1597).
if there were no clouds, we shouldn’t 
enjoy the sun  We cannot fully appreci-
ate the good things in life unless they are 
interspersed with bad times: Life could 
be better at the moment, but I mustn’t grum-
ble—if there were no clouds, we shouldn’t 
enjoy the sun.
if there were no God, it would be neces-
sary to invent him  See if god did not 
exist, it would be necessary to invent 
him.
 if there were no God, it would be necessary to invent him
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   135 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
136
if there were no receivers, there would 
be no thieves  Those who assist wrong-
doers indirectly by enabling them to profi t 
from their crimes are equally guilty: Read-
ers are hungry for stories about other people’s 
private lives, however unscrupulously they may 
be obtained, so the editors of these publications 
should not take all the blame—if there were 
no receivers, there would be no thieves. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin, occurring in Chaucer’s Canterbury 
Tales (c. 1390).
Variant of this proverb: the receiver 
is as bad as the thief.
if the shoe fi ts, wear it  If it seems 
that a critical remark applies to you, 
then you must accept it; often said when 
somebody’s response to a general remark 
suggests that it is appropriate to that par-
ticular person: “‘You mean me? Are you 
callin me a son of a bitch?’ ‘If the shoe 
fi ts, friend, you wear it’” (James Jones, 
From Here to Eternity, 1951). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1773. 
A facetious variant is “If the shoe fi ts, it 
isn’t on sale.”
Variant of this proverb: if the cap 
fi ts, wear it.
if the sky falls, we shall catch larks  Do 
not make plans based on things that can-
not possibly happen: ”If I could convince 
the committee that the project has educational 
value, they might give us the funding we need.” 
“And if the sky falls, we shall catch larks.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in c. 1445.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if a pig had wings, it might fly; if 
ifs and ans were pots and pans, there’d 
be no work for tinkers; if wishes were 
horses, beggars would ride.
if two ride on a horse, one must ride 
behind  When two people undertake a 
joint activity or enterprise, one of them 
invariably takes the lead and the other has 
to be content with a more subordinate 
role; also used of a fi ght or argument, 
where only one can win and the other 
must lose or surrender: “Collaboration 
on a book is an awkward business. If 
two people ride one horse, one of them 
must ride behind” (Anna Clarke, The 
Mystery Lady, 1986). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in Shakespeare’s play Much Ado 
about Nothing (3:5), “An two men ride of 
a horse, one must ride behind.”
Variant of this proverb: when two 
ride one horse, one must sit behind.
if wind blows on you through a hole, say 
your prayers and mind your soul  It is 
not good for your health to be in a drafty 
place: My aunt liked to sit in the corner of 
the room, far from any half-open doors or 
windows. “If wind blows on you through a 
hole, say your prayers and mind your soul,” 
she used to say. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1736 in Papers of Benjamin 
Franklin.
if wishes were horses, beggars would 
ride  There is no point in indulging in 
wishful thinking: “I agree that she’d be an 
ideal wife . . . but if wishes were horses, 
then beggars would ride” (Mary Scott, The 
White Elephant, 1959). The proverb dates 
from before 1628 in the form “If wishes 
were horses, poor men would ride.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if a pig had wings, it might fly; 
if ifs and ans were pots and pans, 
there’d be no work for tinkers; if 
the sky falls, we shall catch larks; 
wishes won’t wash dishes.
if there were no receivers, there would be no thieves
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   136 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
137
if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em  If you 
cannot defeat your rivals or opponents, 
it may be expedient to form an alliance 
with them; alternatively, if you can’t stop 
people doing something you object to, 
you might as well start doing it yourself: 
Our competitors initially condemned our busi-
ness methods as unscrupulous, but when we 
began to dominate the market they were forced 
to follow suit, on the basis of the saying “If 
you can’t beat ’em, join ’em.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, in its variant form, in 
1941, but with the implication that it had 
long been in use as a political adage.
Variant of this proverb: if you can’t 
lick ’em, join ’em.
if you can’t be good, be careful  If you 
are tempted to do something immoral or 
illegal, take care not to land yourself in 
trouble by being caught or found out—
specifi cally, if you are going to engage in 
casual sex, use a contraceptive. It is said 
jocularly as part of a good-bye: “Always 
bear in mind what the country mother 
said to her daughter who was coming 
up to town to be apprenticed to the 
Bond Street millinery, ‘For heaven’s sake 
be good; but if you can’t be good, be 
careful’” (Arthur M. Binstead, Pitcher in 
Paradise, 1903). The quotation is the fi rst 
recorded use of the proverb. The senti-
ment it expresses, however, is of ancient 
origin: compare the 11th-century Latin 
proverb “Si non caste, tamen caute [If not 
chastely, nevertheless cautiously].”
if you can’t bite, never show your 
teeth  Do not make empty threats; also 
used to warn against making a show of 
aggression when you unable to defend 
yourself: If you can’t bite, never show your 
teeth—they know you have no legal grounds 
for evicting them, and they will laugh in your 
face if you threaten to do so. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1615 by J. Chamberlain.
Variant of this proverb: never show 
your teeth unless you can bite.
if you can’t lick ’em, join ’em  See if you 
can’t beat ’em, join ’em.
if you can’t run with the big dogs, 
stay under the porch  If you lack the 
strength, courage, skill, or experience to 
compete with the major players—in poli-
tics, business, or any other fi eld—then it 
is better not to try at all: “Signaling that 
he was primed for battle, Mr. Bush closed 
with these words: ‘So you tell Governor 
Clinton and that Congress, “If you can’t 
run with the big dogs, stay under the 
porch”’” (New York Times, 1992).
if you can’t stand the heat, get out of the 
kitchen  If you cannot cope with the pace 
or stress, as in a competitive industry or in 
a position of high offi ce, then you should 
leave or resign: “If you can’t stand the heat, 
get out of the kitchen. That’s what tough-
talking politicians say, making it sound as 
though only a wimp would head for the 
exit” (Washington Post, 1990). The proverb 
was popularized by President Harry S. Tru-
man (1884–1972), who attributed it to his 
friend General Harry Vaughan.
Variant of this proverb: if you don’t 
like the heat, get out of the kitchen.
if you desire peace, prepare for war  See 
if you want peace, prepare for war.
if you don’t like it, you can lump it 
Whether or not you like what is offered or 
approve of what is proposed, you will have 
to put up with it: I’m inviting Jack and Sarah 
 if you don’t like it, you can lump it
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   137 1/29/07   5:12:40 PM
138
for Thanksgiving, and if you don’t like it you 
can lump it. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1828. The phrase lump it, which means 
“put up with it,” is sometimes replaced by 
a more vulgar alternative.
if you don’t like the heat, get out of the 
kitchen  See if you can’t stand the 
heat, get out of the kitchen.
if you don’t make mistakes, you don’t 
make anything  Do not be afraid of 
making mistakes—the only way to avoid 
them is to do nothing at all: Errors like these 
can easily be put right, so don’t worry—if you 
don’t make mistakes, you don’t make anything. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in a speech 
by Edward John Phelps (1822–1900) at 
the Mansion House, London, England, in 
January 1889: “The man who makes no 
mistakes does not usually make anything.”
Variant of this proverb: he who never 
made a mistake never made anything.
if you don’t speculate, you can’t accu-
mulate  You will not succeed or get rich 
unless you are prepared to take risks and 
spend money: I was uneasy at fi rst about put-
ting money into the venture, but if you don’t 
speculate you can’t accumulate, and it could 
prove to be a very profi table investment if all 
goes well. The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
in its variant form, in 1941 in D. Dodge’s 
Death and Taxes.
Variant of this proverb: you never 
accumulate if you don’t speculate.
if you don’t toot your own horn, nobody 
else will  See toot your own horn 
lest the same be never tooted.
if you lie down with dogs, you’ll get up 
with fl eas  If you associate with dishon-
est or disreputable people, you are likely 
to acquire their undesirable qualities: “If 
you lie down with dogs, you’ll get up with 
fl eas, and that’s the fruits of travelling with 
a fool” (Charles Lever, Jack Hinton, 1842). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1573 in 
the form “He that goes to bed with dogs 
arises with fl eas.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: he that touches pitch shall be 
defiled.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the sun loses nothing by shining 
into a puddle.
if you pay peanuts, you get monkeys 
Competent and highly qualifi ed people 
will not work for derisory fees or wages: 
She complained about the caliber of applicants 
for the post, but when she told me what they 
would be earning, I was not surprised. “If you 
pay peanuts, you get monkeys,” I said. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1966 by L. 
Coulthard in Director.
if you play with fi re, you get burned  If 
you engage in dangerous activities, mix 
with dangerous people, and the like, 
you are likely to suffer harm: I warned 
her that it was a risky enterprise, but she 
wouldn’t listen, so I’ve no sympathy for 
her—if you play with fi re, you get burned. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1884, but the fi gurative phrase 
to play with fi re is of earlier origin. It 
occurs in Henry Vaughan’s poem “The 
Garland” (1655): “I played with fi re, did 
counsell spurn. . . . But never thought 
that fi re would burn.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t play 
with fi re.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s ill jesting with edged tools.
if you don’t like the heat, get out of the kitchen
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   138 1/29/07   5:12:40 PM
139
if you’re born to be hanged, then you’ll 
never be drowned  Everybody is des-
tined to die in a particular way at a 
particular moment and is therefore not 
in mortal danger at any other time; said 
by those who risk death and of those who 
miraculously escape it: His friends urged 
him not to set sail until the weather improved, 
but he simply shrugged his shoulders and 
replied, “If you’re born to be hanged, then you’ll 
never be drowned.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1593, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin. 
Compare the 14th-century French pro-
verb “Noyer ne peut, cil qui doit pendre [He 
cannot drown who must hang].”
Variant of this proverb: he that is born 
to be hanged shall never be drowned.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every bullet has its billet.
if you’re not part of the solution, you’re 
part of the problem  Those who can-
not or will not help to solve a problem 
or improve a situation are a positive hin-
drance: “We must fi ght ‘hunger,’ but never 
Communism, even when Communism 
itself is the direct cause of hunger. Well, as 
our radicals used to say, if you’re not part 
of the solution, you’re part of the prob-
lem” (National Review, 1985). The proverb 
is attributed to the U.S. activist Eldridge 
Cleaver (1935–98), who used the words 
“you’re either part of the solution or you’re 
part of the problem” in a speech in 1968, 
but it may be of earlier origin.
if you run after two hares, you will catch 
neither  If you try to do two things at 
once you will fail at both: “Let’s take 
things a step at a time. You know what 
they say. If you run after two hares you 
will catch neither” (Peter O’Donnell, The 
Xanadu Talisman, 1981). The proverb is 
probably of ancient origin; in his Adagia 
(1500) the Dutch humanist Desiderius 
Erasmus quotes the Latin proverb “Duos 
insequens lepores, neutrum capit [He who 
chases two hares catches neither].”
Variant of this proverb: he who 
chases two hares catches neither.
if you sing before breakfast, you’ll cry 
before supper  See sing before break-
fast, cry before night.
if you’ve got it, fl aunt it  Those who 
have wealth, beauty, or talent should not be 
ashamed to show it off; used as an excuse 
for ostentation: “Old money’s motto was, 
If you have it, hide it. New money’s motto 
was, If you have it, fl aunt it” (Sidney Sheldon, 
The Master of the Game, 1982).
if you want a thing done well, do it 
yourself  The only way to be sure that 
something is done properly is to do 
it yourself—you cannot rely on other 
people to do exactly what you want: I 
told you to slice the meat, not hack it into 
chunks. Give me the knife—if you want a 
thing well done, do it yourself! The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in 1541. Its current form may date 
from 1858, when it was used in a poem 
by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: “That’s 
what I always say; if you want a thing to be 
well done,/You must do it yourself.”
Variant of this proverb: if you want 
something done right, do it yourself.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you would be well served, serve 
yourself.
if you want peace, prepare for war  A 
nation that is seen to be ready and able to 
 if you want peace, prepare for war
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   139 1/29/07   5:12:40 PM
140
defend itself—for example, with strong 
armed forces and powerful weapons—is 
less likely to be attacked: “As always, the 
success of diplomacy rests on the latent 
availability of force. If you seek peace, 
prepare for war” (Washington Times, 1990). 
The proverb occurs in the work of the 
Roman military writer Flavius Vegetius 
(fourth century a.d.): “qui desiderat pacem, 
praeparet bellum [he who desires peace 
must prepare for war],” but it is probably 
of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: if you desire 
peace, prepare for war.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: one sword keeps another in its 
scabbard.
if you want something done, ask a busy 
person  Busy people are reliable and effi -
cient workers who get things done quickly 
and are adept at reorganizing their time to 
slot in extra work: It’s the usual story: if you 
want something done, ask a busy person. At least 
you know they will deliver the goods.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the busiest men have the most leisure.
if you want something done right, do it 
yourself  See if you want a thing done 
well, do it yourself.
if you want to live and thrive, let the 
spider run alive  According to popular 
superstition, it is unlucky to kill a spider: 
I’m terrifi ed of these eight-legged beasts, but 
every time I reach for a newspaper to squash 
one, or turn on the faucet to drown one, I recall 
a rhyme learned in childhood, “If you want to 
live and thrive, let the spider run alive.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1867, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
regional use in England.
Variant of this proverb: he who 
would wish to thrive, must let spiders 
run alive.
if you won’t work, you shan’t eat  See he 
who does not work, neither should 
he eat.
if you would be happy for a week take a 
wife, if you would be happy for a month 
kill a pig, but if you would be happy all 
your life plant a garden  The pleasures 
of marriage, good food and so on are 
ephemeral, but a garden is a lasting 
source of joy: I had a bachelor uncle who 
used to say, “If you would be happy for a 
week take a wife, if you would be happy for a 
month kill a pig, but if you would be happy 
all your life plant a garden.” My recent divorce 
has proved the fi rst part of the saying to be 
accurate, and I am now seriously considering 
the horticultural option. The proverb exists 
in numerous forms, dating from before 
1661. Most versions include the opening 
clause, but other suggestions for lifetime 
happiness are “be an honest man” and 
“turn priest.”
if you would be well served, serve your-
self  The work of hired staff may fall 
below the standard you require, so the 
only way to be sure of satisfaction is to 
do the work yourself: “‘If you would be 
well served, serve yourself.’ Some gentle-
men took pleasure in being their own 
gardeners” (J. E. Austen-Leigh, A Memoir 
of Jane Austen, 1871). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1706.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you want a thing done well, do it 
yourself.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
why keep a dog and bark yourself?
if you want something done, ask a busy person
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   140 1/29/07   5:12:40 PM
141
ignorance is a voluntary misfortune  Ev-
erybody has the opportunity to acquire 
knowledge, so you have only yourself to 
blame if you remain ignorant: My grand-
father was a self-taught scholar, whose motto 
was “Ignorance is a voluntary misfortune.” The 
proverb is recorded as a regional expres-
sion in the United States.
ignorance is bliss  It is often better not 
to have knowledge that would alarm or 
distress you: Ignorance is bliss, and we drove 
off without a care in the world, unaware of the 
disaster that lay ahead. The proverb comes 
from Thomas Gray’s poem “Ode on a 
Distant Prospect of Eton College” (1742): 
“Yet ah! why should they know their 
fate? . . . Thought would destroy their 
paradise./No more; where ignorance is 
bliss,/’Tis folly to be wise.” It has given 
rise to the clichés blissful ignorance and 
blissfully ignorant.
Variant of this proverb: where igno-
rance is bliss, ’tis folly to be wise.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what you don’t know can’t hurt 
you.
ignorance of the law is no excuse  You 
cannot argue that you are not guilty of 
a crime because you were unaware that 
you were doing anything illegal: I had no 
idea that drinking alcohol in public places was 
banned, but ignorance of the law is no excuse 
in this or any other country. The proverb is 
of Latin origin: “Ignorantia iuris neminem 
excusat [Ignorance of the law excuses 
nobody].”
Variant of this proverb: ignorance of 
the law is no excuse for breaking it.
an ill agreement is better than a good 
judgment  It is better to reach an out-
of-court settlement than to pursue a case 
in court: The old man was disappointed with 
the compensation his rival agreed but reminded 
himself that “an ill agreement is better than 
a good judgment.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1640 in George Herbert’s 
Outlandish Proverbs.
an ill beginning makes an ill ending 
Something that is badly planned or that 
starts badly is unlikely to end well: We 
had problems with transportation and supplies 
in the early stages of the expedition, which 
did not bode well for us—an ill beginning 
makes an ill ending. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1562 in A. Broke’s Romeus 
and Juliet.
an ill bird lays an ill egg  Good things 
rarely result from bad origins: I had hoped 
for a better offer, but the man’s a gangster and 
as they say, “an ill bird lays an ill egg.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1581 in G. 
Pettie’s Guazzo’s Civil Conversation.
ill doers are ill dreaders  See evil doers 
are evil dreaders.
ill-gotten goods never thrive  Some-
thing acquired by dishonest, illegitimate, 
or underhand means—specifi cally, stolen 
money or property—will not bring good 
fortune to the person who acquires it: 
“That ill-gotten gain never prospers . . . is 
the trite consolation administered to the 
easy dupe, when he has been tricked out 
of his money or estate” (Charles Lamb, 
Elia’s Last Essays, 1826). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in the 16th century, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of ancient origin. 
Compare Cicero (106–43 b.c.): “male 
parta, male dilabuntur [things ill gotten slip 
away in evil ways].”
 ill-gotten goods never thrive
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   141 1/29/07   5:12:40 PM
142
Variant of this proverb: ill-gotten 
goods seldom prosper.
an ill master makes an ill servant  See 
like master, like man.
ill news comes apace  See bad news 
travels fast.
ill weeds grow apace  Worthless people 
or evil things have a tendency to fl ourish 
where better ones fail: Ill weeds grow apace, 
and our efforts to stamp out these corrupt prac-
tices were of no avail. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1470 in Anglia, “Wyl[d] weed 
ys sone y-growe” (Wild weed is soon 
grown), but the sentiment it expresses is 
of earlier origin. Compare the 14th-cen-
tury French proverb “Male herbe croist [Bad 
grass thrives].”
an ill wind blows no good  See it’s an ill 
wind that blows nobody any good.
143
imitation is the sincerest form of fl at-
tery  Somebody who copies something 
is paying an indirect compliment, by 
showing that he or she considers the 
original worthy of imitation: On the basis 
that imitation is the sincerest form of fl attery, 
the supermarket should pay extra money to 
the original brand-name owners for the simi-
lar goods they are selling. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1820 without the word 
form, which was not added until the 20th 
century.
Variant of this proverb: imitation is 
the highest form of fl attery.
in a calm sea every man is a pilot  When 
times are easy, everyone wants to be 
in charge: “When winds are steady and 
skies are clear, every hand the ship must 
steer” (D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson). 
The implication is that when things get 
diffi cult these same volunteers will not 
be so eager.
an inch is as good as a mile  See give a 
man an inch and he’ll take a mile.
in for a penny, in for a pound  Once 
you have committed yourself to some-
thing, you might as well do it whole-
heartedly and see it through to the end: I 
began to doubt the wisdom of my chosen course 
of action, but in for a penny, in for a pound. 
Besides, it was probably more dangerous to turn 
back than to go on. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1695 in Edward Ravenscroft’s 
Canterbury Guests.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one might as well be hanged for a 
sheep as for a lamb.
in politics a man must learn to rise above 
principle  A successful politician cannot 
afford to have too many scruples; a cynical 
observation: They say that in politics a man 
must learn to rise above principle, and by his 
second year of offi ce the president had left the 
principles on which he was elected far behind.
interest will not lie  People will do 
more than they would otherwise do if 
they pursue something in which they 
have an interest. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1688 in John Bunyan’s Work 
of Jesus Christ: “Our English proverb is, 
Interest will not lie; interest will make a 
man do what which otherwise he would 
not do.”
in the country of the blind, the one-eyed 
man is king  People of only limited abil-
ity can succeed when surrounded by those 
who are even less able than themselves: I 
had few of the skills required for survival in the 
wild, but my fellow castaways had even fewer, 
and in the country of the blind the one-eyed man 
is king. The proverb is probably of ancient 
origin; in his Adagia (1500) the Dutch 
humanist Desiderius Erasmus quotes the 
Latin proverb “In regione caecorum rex est 
luscus [In the kingdom of the blind the one-
eyed man is king].” H. G. Wells wrote a 
short story, The Country of the Blind (1911), 
in which a man tries and fails to prove the 
literal truth of the proverb in a land popu-
lated by sightless people.
Variant of this proverb: in the land of 
the blind, the one-eyed are kings.
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love  Spring is tra-
ditionally considered to be the time when 
the desire for romance or sex is strongest: 
We often see a distinct increase in our sales of 
contraceptives at this time of year—perhaps 
there is some truth in the saying that in the 
 in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   143 1/29/07   5:12:41 PM
144
spring a young man’s fancy lightly turns to 
thoughts of love! The proverb comes from 
Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s poem “Locksley 
Hall” (1842). Facetious modern variants 
have other words in place of love, such as 
baseball.
into every life a little rain must fall  Ev-
erybody must have his or her share of mis-
fortune; often said in consolation, with the 
implication that such misfortune it is only 
temporary: “Into every life a little rain must 
fall;/And, for sure, it poured down on you.” 
(Ralph McTell, Weather the Storm, 1976). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1935.
Variant of this proverb: into each life 
some rain must fall.
in unity there is strength  See union 
is strength.
in vain the net is spread in the sight of 
the bird  Nobody will fall into a trap if 
he or she is in a position to watch it being 
laid—to catch people out you must be 
both discreet and well-prepared: “‘If they 
come, we shall be ready,’ said Bessas. ‘In 
vain the net is spread in the sight of the 
bird’” (L. Sprague De Camp, The Dragon of 
the Ishtar Gate, 1961). The proverb is of bib-
lical origin: “Surely in vain the net is spread 
in the sight of any bird” (Proverbs 1:17).
in war there is no substitute for vic-
tory  A war is only truly won by total 
defeat of the enemy, not by diplomatic 
negotiations or compromise: The debate 
was evenly divided between those who believed 
that in war there is no substitute for vic-
tory, and those who favored a less belligerent 
approach. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in General Dwight D. Eisenhower’s Letters 
to Mamie (1944), but it is popularly asso-
ciated with General Douglas MacArthur, 
who used it in a speech in 1951.
in wine there is truth  See there’s 
truth in wine.
iron not used soon rusts  See the used 
key is always bright.
145
it’ll all be the same in a hundred 
years  Trivial problems or mistakes of 
the present moment have no lasting sig-
nifi cance or effect, so there is no point in 
worrying about them; also used to imply 
that there will always be similar problems 
as there are now: “‘It doesn’t matter,’ she 
answered quietly, out of the darkness. ‘I 
am strong enough to suffer, and live. . . . 
It doesn’t matter; it will all be the same 
a hundred years hence’” (Wilkie Collins, 
No Name, 1862). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1611 in the form “All will be 
one at the latter day.”
Variant of this proverb: it’ll all be the 
same a hundred years hence.
it’ll all come out in the wash  All will 
ultimately be satisfactorily resolved: I’m 
up to my ears in debt, my job is hanging by 
a thread, and my wife has just left me, so 
please don’t tell me “It’ll all come out in the 
wash”—how can it? The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in 1612 
in Cervantes’s Don Quixote.
Variant of this proverb: it’ll all come 
right in the wash.
it never rains but it pours  One setback, 
misfortune, or other undesirable occur-
rence is inevitably followed by many 
more; also occasionally used of pleasant 
things, such as a run of good luck: Talk 
146
about it never rains but it pours. The children 
have all been ill this week and then the washing 
machine and the drier have both broken down. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1726 in 
the form “It cannot rain but it pours,” the 
title of a book by the Scottish physician 
John Arbuthnot.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
misfortunes never come singly.
I today, you tomorrow  See today you, 
tomorrow me.
it’s a foolish sheep that makes the 
wolf his confessor  Do not confi de in 
somebody unless you are certain that 
he or she can be trusted: I can’t believe 
that you told Maggie, of all people, about 
the missing money—you should have guessed 
she’d go straight to the boss and try to get 
you fi red. It’s a foolish sheep that makes the 
wolf his confessor. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1642 in a collection of Ital-
ian proverbs.
it’s a good horse that never stumbles 
See a stumble may prevent a fall.
it’s all grist for the mill  See all is grist 
that comes to the mill.
it’s all in a day’s work  Unpleasant 
things have to be accepted as part of the 
daily routine; also used to play down a 
major achievement or a heroic act by 
implying that it is just part of your job: 
“The mules merely shook themselves and 
then stared stonily ahead, as if it were all 
in the day’s work” (Francis Edward Youn-
ghusband, The Heart of a Continent, 1896). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1738 
in Jonathan Swift’s A Complete Collection of 
Polite and Ingenious Conversation.
it’s a long road that has no turning  An 
undesirable situation, or a run of bad luck, 
cannot last forever—things are bound to 
improve eventually: They say that it’s a long 
road that has no turning, but the end of our 
problems was not yet in sight. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in the 17th century 
in the form “It’s a long run that never 
turns.”
Variant of this proverb: it’s a long 
lane that has no turning.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: be the day weary or be the day 
long, at last it ringeth to evensong; 
the longest day must have an end.
it’s always darkest before dawn  See the 
darkest hour is just before dawn.
it’s always fair weather when good 
friends get together  The company of 
good friends is a constant source of plea-
sure and happiness: I meet up with a group of 
my old college friends every two or three months, 
and we have a great time. If any of us has prob-
lems, they’re soon forgotten—it’s always fair 
weather when good friends get together.
it’s always the unexpected that hap-
pens  See the unexpected always hap-
pens.
it’s an ill bird that fouls its own nest  You 
should not say or do anything that will bring 
discredit or harm to your own family or 
country: “Nothing . . . can excuse the bad 
taste of Samuel Butler’s virulent attack upon 
his defenceless family. . . . It’s an ill bird that 
fouls its own nest” (London Times, 1926). The 
proverb dates from before 1250.
it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any 
good  There is usually somebody who 
I today, you tomorrow
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   146 1/29/07   5:12:41 PM
147
benefi ts from an unfavorable set of circum-
stances: The collapse of the company was a major 
disaster for employees and stockholders alike, 
but it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any good, 
and some of its competitors were quick to take 
advantage of its demise. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546. It occurs in Shakespeare’s 
play Henry VI, Part 3 (2:5) in the form “Ill 
blows the wind that profi ts nobody.”
Variant of this proverb: an ill wind 
blows no good.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one man’s loss is another man’s gain.
it’s a poor dog that’s not worth whistling 
for  Everybody has some value, or some 
redeeming feature: It’s a poor dog that’s 
not worth whistling for, and I was prepared to 
give him the opportunity to prove himself. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546.
Variant of this proverb: it’s a poor 
dog that deserves not a crust.
it’s a poor heart that never rejoices 
Nobody can be miserable or gloomy 
all the time: “‘Well,’ continued he, ‘it’s 
a poor heart that never rejoiceth.’ He 
then poured out half a tumbler of rum” 
(Captain Marryat, Peter Simple, 1834). The 
quotation is the fi rst recorded use of the 
proverb.
Variant of this proverb: it’s a sad 
heart that never rejoices.
it’s a sad house where the hen crows 
louder than the cock No home can 
be happy where the woman has more 
infl uence than the man: “They are sory 
houses, where the hennes crowe, and 
the cock holdes his peace” (John Florio, 
First Fruites, 1578). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1573 in J. Sandford’s The 
Garden Pleasure.
it’s as cheap sitting as standing  You 
might as well sit down and be comfort-
able, if you have the opportunity, rather 
than standing up: “He returned to Tommie 
Redhill’s car. ‘Jump in, Inspector,’ Tommie 
suggested, opening the door at his side. 
‘It’s as cheap sitting as standing’” (J. J. Con-
nington, The Sweepstake Murders, 1932). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1666.
it’s a sin to steal a pin  Theft is a crime, 
regardless of the size or value of what is 
stolen: It’s a sin to steal a pin, and salesclerks 
who help themselves to candy bars without 
paying for them are just as guilty as one who 
takes a handful of cash from the till. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1875, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
general use, especially as an admonition 
to children.
it’s a small world  It is amazing how 
often you meet somebody you know—
or somebody who knows one of your 
friends or relatives, comes from your 
home town, or went to your school—in 
a distant or unexpected place; said when 
such a coincidence occurs: I was chatting 
with the guy in the next seat on the airplane, 
and it turned out he’d gone to college with my 
best friend—it’s a small world. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in the late 19th century: “Mr. Ardale 
and I have met in London. . . . They say 
the world’s very small, don’t they” (A. W. 
Pinero, The Second Mrs. Tanqueray, 1893).
it’s as well to know which way the wind 
blows  See straws show which way 
the wind blows.
it’s a wise child that knows its own 
father  People cannot always be certain—
 it’s a wise child that knows its own father
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   147 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
148
but sometimes instinctively know—who 
their natural father is: I was devastated to 
learn that my mother’s husband—the man 
who had raised me—had played no part in my 
conception. As they say, it’s a wise child that 
knows its own father. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1584 in the form “Wise sons 
they be in very deed, that know their 
parents who did them breed.” It occurs 
in Shakespeare’s play The Merchant of Ven-
ice (2:2) with the wording reversed: “It is 
a wise father that knows his own child.”
it’s best to be off with the old love 
before you are on with the new  Do not 
embark on a new relationship until your 
old one is over: Remembering the proverb 
“It’s best to be off with the old love before you 
are on with the new,” I decided to make a clean 
break with Laura that evening. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1801, but with the 
implication that it was of earlier origin.
it’s best to be on the safe side  See it’s 
better to be on the safe side.
it’s better to be an hour too early than 
a minute too late  If you arrive far too 
early, as for an appointment or a fl ight you 
can easily fi ll the intervening time, but if 
you arrive just a moment too late, you 
may miss it altogether: “Surely we don’t have 
to go yet—it’s only twenty miles to the coast, 
and the boat doesn’t leave till midday.” “It’s 
better to be an hour too early than a minute 
too late.”
Variant of this proverb: better three 
hours too soon than a minute too late.
it’s better to be born lucky than 
rich  Rich people may lose their money 
and have nothing, but lucky people will 
always be able to get what they want: 
Within six months he had squandered his entire 
inheritance in the casinos of Europe, and was 
forced to acknowledge the truth of the saying 
“It’s better to be born lucky than rich.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 in the 
form “Better to have good fortune than be 
a rich man’s child.”
it’s better to be happy than wise  Hap-
piness is more important than wisdom, 
knowledge, or learning: Don’t put pressure 
on your children to continue their education if 
they are not academically inclined—it’s bet-
ter to be happy than wise. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in John Heywood, 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
it’s better to be on the safe side  It is 
advisable to err on the side of caution 
and avoid unnecessary risk: The wound 
is unlikely to be infected, but I’ll prescribe a 
course of antibiotics, just in case—it’s better 
to be on the safe side. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in 1668 
in John Dryden and William Cavendish 
Newcastle’s, Sir Martin Mar-all.
Variant of this proverb: it’s best to be 
on the safe side.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
better safe than sorry.
it’s better to be right than in the 
majority  Do not follow or side with the 
majority, just for the sake of conformity, 
if you believe them to be wrong: I was the 
only member of the committee to vote in favor 
of the proposal, but I am convinced that it is a 
good thing, and it’s better to be right than in the 
majority. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1691 in John Norris’s Practical Discourses.
it’s better to die on your feet than live 
on your knees  It is better to be killed 
it’s best to be off with the old love before you are on with the new
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   148 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
149
in active resistance, or while fi ghting for 
a cause, than to surrender and condemn 
yourself to a life of servitude: “‘Why don’t 
you use some sense and try to be more like 
me? . . .’ ‘Because it’s better to die on one’s 
feet than to live on one’s knees,’ Nately 
retorted with triumphant and lofty con-
viction” (Joseph Heller, Catch-22, 1961). 
In its current form the proverb is generally 
associated with the Spanish communist 
politician Dolores Ibarruri, who used it 
in a speech in 1936, at the beginning of 
the Spanish Civil War, urging the people 
to resist the fascist forces. The sentiment 
expressed by the proverb, however, is of 
much earlier origin.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
a live dog is better than a dead lion.
it’s better to give than to receive  The 
act of giving is more worthy, noble, 
and spiritually satisfying than the act of 
receiving: “’Tis better to Give than to 
Receive, but yet ’tis Madness to give so 
much Charity to Others, as to become the 
Subject of it our Selves” (Samuel Palmer, 
Moral Essays on Some of the Most Curious 
and Signifi cant English, Scotch, and Foreign 
Proverbs, 1710). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “It is more blessed to give than to 
receive” (Acts 20:35).
Variant of this proverb: it’s more 
blessed to give than to receive.
it’s better to laugh than to cry  It is bet-
ter to see the funny side of an unfortunate 
situation than to distress yourself about it: 
I hurt my shoulder when I fell off the stage, but 
it’s better to laugh than to cry, and the audi-
ence thought it was all part of the show.
it’s better to light one candle than curse 
the darkness  Any positive action, how-
ever small, that helps to improve an unde-
sirable state of affairs is infi nitely better 
than simply bemoaning or complaining 
about it: The charity does what little it can to 
help the victims of persecution and oppression 
around the world, on the basis that it’s bet-
ter to light a candle than curse the darkness. 
Probably of Chinese origin, the proverb 
is the motto of the Christophers, a U.S. 
religious organization founded in 1945. 
In a tribute to Eleanor Roosevelt, after 
her death in 1962, the American politician 
Adlai Stevenson said, “She would rather 
light a candle than curse the darkness, and 
her glow has warmed the world.”
Variant of this proverb: it’s better 
to light one little candle than curse the 
darkness.
it’s better to lose the battle and win 
the war  It is sometimes prudent or 
expedient to concede a minor point in an 
argument or dispute in order to gain the 
overall victory: The protesters were content 
to admit defeat in this particular campaign, 
knowing that their action had forced the 
government to rethink the whole road-build-
ing program statewide. “It’s better to lose the 
battle and win the war,” said a spokesperson 
for the protest group. It is unclear when this 
proverb was fi rst used, but the sentiment 
was expressed by Charles de Gaulle on 
June 18, 1940, when he announced a 
few days after the fall of Paris to the Ger-
mans, “La France a perdu une bataille! Mais 
la France n’a pas perdu la guerre” (France 
has lost a battle, but France has not lost 
the war).
it’s better to travel hopefully than to 
arrive  The expectation of success, or 
the process of working toward this end, 
is often more enjoyable or satisfying than 
 it’s better to travel hopefully than to arrive
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   149 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
150
the actual result: “As much as it was bet-
ter to travel hopefully than to arrive, as 
much as I believed that and had lived by 
it, once you’ve arrived, you’ve arrived, 
and there’s not much to be done about it” 
(Mark Vonnegut, The Eden Express, 1975). 
The proverb comes from Robert Louis 
Stevenson’s Virginibus Puerisque (1881): “To 
travel hopefully is a better thing than to 
arrive, and the true success is to labour.”
it’s dogged as does it  Anything can be 
done with determination and persever-
ance: “There ain’t nowt a man can’t bear 
if he’ll only be dogged. . . . It’s dogged as 
does it. It’s not thinking about it” (Anthony 
Trollope, The Last Chronicle of Barset, 1867). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1864 in 
M. B. Chesnut’s Diary.
it’s easier to tear down than to build 
up  It is easier to destroy something, 
such as a building or an idea, than it is 
to construct or restore it: The overthrow 
of the monarchy was accomplished with ease, 
and relatively little bloodshed, but the creation 
of the new republic proved to be rather more 
diffi cult. As the revolutionaries discovered, it’s 
always far easier to tear down than to build up. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1577 
in the form “It is easy to raze, but hard 
to build.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: a jackass can kick a barn door 
down, but it takes a carpenter to 
build one.
it’s easy to be wise after the event  With 
hindsight it is easy to see why something 
went wrong or what should have been 
done, but this is of no practical purpose: 
“It is easy to be wise after the event, but it 
does certainly appear that . . . the action 
at Paardeberg was as unnecessary as it was 
expensive” (Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, The 
Great Boer War, 1900). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1616, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t shut the barn door after the 
horse is stolen.
it’s easy to fi nd a stick to beat a dog  It 
is easy to fi nd some reason or excuse to 
justify a critical attack or a harsh punish-
ment: “Excuses were abundant. . . . It 
is easy to fi nd a stick to beat a sick dog” 
(Samuel Smiles, Thrift, 1875). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1564. The English 
popular historian Philip Guedalla wrote 
punningly in Masters and Men (1923), “Any 
stigma, as the old saying is, will serve to 
beat a dogma.”
Variants of this proverb: any stick 
will serve to beat a dog with; he who 
has a mind to beat a dog will easily fi nd 
a stick.
it’s good fi shing in troubled waters  It 
is sometimes possible to take advantage 
of other people’s diffi culties in times 
of confl ict: “Thinking it (as the proverb 
saith) best fi shing in troubled waters” (Sir 
John Harington, Orlando Furioso, 1591). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1568 in 
Richard Grafton’s Chronicles.
it’s good to make a bridge of gold to a 
fl ying enemy  Retreating enemies will 
kill or destroy anybody or anything that 
stands in their way, so it is advisable to 
give them free passage: Countless lives 
could have been spared if the general had 
paid heed to the military saying “It’s good to 
make a bridge of gold to a fl ying enemy.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
it’s dogged as does it
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   150 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
151
1576, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
ancient origin.
it’s hard to live in Rome and strive 
against the Pope  See it’s ill sitting at 
rome and striving with the pope.
it’s idle to swallow the cow and choke 
on the tail  Once you have completed 
the major part of an enterprise or under-
taking, it is foolish not to see it through 
to the end: “We had gone too far to turn 
back, and as our proverb says, ‘It is idle to 
swallow the cow and choke on the tail’” 
(John Buchan, Salute to Adventurers, 1915). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1659 in 
James Howell’s Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: don’t swal-
low the cow and worry with the tail.
it’s ill jesting with edged tools  Do not 
trifl e with dangerous things or people: 
Taking drugs like these for “recreational” pur-
poses is a risky business—it’s ill jesting with 
edged tools. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1588 in Robert Greene’s Pandosto.
Variant of this proverb: don’t play 
with edged tools.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you play with fire, you get burned.
it’s ill sitting at Rome and striving with 
the Pope  It is foolish or pointless to 
quarrel or fi ght with somebody who has 
supreme power in the place where you 
are: “‘It is ill sitting at Rome and striving 
with the Pope.’ Nebuchadnezzar’s palace 
was not precisely the place to dispute with 
Nebuchadnezzar” (Alexander MacLaren, 
Ezekiel, 1908). The proverb dates from 
before 1628.
Variant of this proverb: it’s hard to 
live in Rome and strive against the Pope.
it’s ill speaking between a full man and 
a fasting  Hungry people are not on the 
best of terms with those who have eaten 
their fi ll: “It’s ill speaking between a full 
man and a fasting, but two fasting men 
are worse at a crack” (John Buchan, The 
Free Fishers, 1934). The proverb dates from 
before 1641.
it’s ill striving against the stream  See 
strive not against the stream.
it’s ill waiting for dead men’s shoes  It 
is not good to be impatiently awaiting 
somebody’s death or retirement to get 
what you want, such as an inheritance or 
promotion: She’s fi rst in line for Jack Mitch-
ell’s job at the head of the New York offi ce, but 
he’s still eight years from retirement, and it’s 
ill waiting for dead men’s shoes. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1530.
Variant of this proverb: he that waits 
for dead men’s shoes may go a long time 
barefoot.
it’s merry in hall when beards wag all  A 
social gathering with many people talking 
together is a happy, convivial affair: It’s 
merry in hall when beards wag all, and the 
noise in the room had reached such a pitch 
that I had to bang loudly on the table to gain 
everybody’s attention. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1300.
it’s more blessed to give than to 
receive  See it’s better to give than 
to receive.
it’s never too late to learn  Nobody is 
too old to acquire knowledge or expe-
rience: “‘It is never too late to learn,’ 
cried he. ‘I will make a fi sherman of you 
in no time, if you will only attend to my 
 it’s never too late to learn
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   151 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
152
 directions’” (Wilkie Collins, After Dark, 
1856). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1678 in the form “It is never too 
late to learn what it is always necessary 
to know.” Its variant form is of earlier 
origin.
Variant of this proverb: never too 
old to learn.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: you can’t teach an old dog new 
tricks.
it’s never too late to mend  People or 
things can be reformed or improved at 
any time: The Church’s message to habitual 
criminals is “It’s never too late to mend.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1590 as the 
title of a pamphlet by the English drama-
tist Robert Greene.
it’s not over till it’s over  Do not antici-
pate the end of something; specifi cally, do 
not give up hope until you have actually 
lost or failed: “Beré won’t say whether 
the company is better off than if it had 
never done the LBO [leveraged buyout]. 
Nor will he declare that the company’s 
problems are behind it: ‘It isn’t over until 
it’s over’” (Fortune, 1991). The proverb 
is attributed to the baseball player Yogi 
Berra (1925–  ), referring to a baseball 
game.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the opera ain’t over till the fat lady 
sings.
it’s not spring until you can plant your 
foot upon twelve daisies  According to 
country lore, spring has not arrived until 
there are so many daisies in fl ower that 
you can tread on twelve at once: Today is 
offi cially the fi rst day of spring, but I won’t be 
putting my winter clothes away just yet—my 
grandmother used to say, “It’s not spring until 
you can plant your foot upon twelve daisies,” 
and there’s not a daisy to be seen on any of 
my neighbors’ lawns. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1863, but with the implica-
tion that it was already in general use. 
Different versions have different numbers 
of daisies, such as nine or six, but the type 
of fl ower remains the same.
it’s not the end of the world  Things 
are not as disastrous as they seem; said in 
reassurance, such as after a minor mishap: 
It looks as though we’re going to miss our 
fl ight, but it’s not the end of the world.
it’s not the size of the dog in the fi ght, 
it’s the size of the fi ght in the dog  In 
any combat or dispute, strength and deter-
mination to win are more important than 
physical size or number: It’s not the size of 
the dog in the fi ght, it’s the size of the fi ght in 
the dog—the protesters were in the minority, 
but they conducted such a powerful and persis-
tent campaign that they eventually won their 
case. The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
it’s not what you know but who you 
know  Infl uential contacts can be more 
useful than qualifi cations or experience; 
often said cynically by those who fail to 
get a job, assignment, or promotion for 
this reason: The other candidate had never 
worked in marketing before, but her uncle is 
president of one of the company’s biggest cus-
tomers, so of course she got the job—it’s not 
what you know, but who you know.
it’s not what you say but how you say 
it  Phraseology and style are often more 
important than the actual content of 
speech or writing: “As one . . . researcher 
it’s never too late to mend
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   152 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
153
explains: ‘It’s not just what they say, it’s 
how they say it. When people talk about 
“change,” what words do they use?’” (New 
York Times Magazine, 1992).
it’s not whether you win or lose, but how 
you play the game  In any contest, play-
ing well and fairly is more important than 
winning: “Exactly what is sportsmanship 
these days? Is it the age-old admonish-
ment that ‘It’s not whether you win or 
lose but how you play the game?’ Or 
is it Vince Lombardi’s rubric that win-
ning isn’t everything, it’s the only thing?” 
(New York Times, 1991). The proverb comes 
from “Alumnus Football” (1941), by the 
U.S. sportswriter Grantland Rice: “For 
when the One Great Scorer comes to 
mark against your name,/He writes—
not that you won or lost—but how you 
played the game.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: winning isn’t everything, it’s the 
only thing.
it’s not work that kills, but worry  Anxi-
ety is more injurious to your health than 
overwork: It’s not work that kills, but worry, 
so those who have lost their jobs and can’t 
afford to feed their families are theoretically 
more at risk than those who are working a 60-
hour week to hang on to the jobs they have. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1879.
Variant of this proverb: worry kills 
more men than work.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: care is no cure; care killed the 
cat.
it’s no use crying over spilled milk  Do 
not distress yourself about mistakes or mis-
fortunes that cannot be put right: “I wish 
now I’d thought about the implications, but 
it’s no good crying over spilt milk” (Jona-
than Gash, The Gondola Scam, 1984). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1659 in the 
form “No weeping for shed milk.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t cry 
over spilled milk.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what’s done cannot be undone.
it’s six of one and half a dozen of the 
other  There is no difference between 
two options or parties: Tom blamed Sarah 
for starting the fi ght, but as far as I could 
tell it was six of one and half a dozen of the 
other. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1836, in Captain Marryat’s novel The 
Pirate: “I never know the children. It’s 
just six of one and half-a-dozen of the 
other.”
it’s the fi rst step that is diffi cult  See 
the first step is the hardest.
it’s the last straw that breaks the camel’s 
back  When somebody is close to his 
or her limit of patience or endurance, it 
takes only one little extra thing to make 
the whole load too much to bear: “As 
the last straw breaks the laden camel’s 
back, this piece of underground infor-
mation crushed the sinking spirits of 
Mr. Dombey” (Charles Dickens, Dombey 
and Son, 1848). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1655 in the form “The last 
feather may be said to break a horse’s 
back.” In modern times it is most fre-
quently encountered in the form of the 
cliché the last straw.
Variant of this proverb: the last straw 
will break the camel’s back.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the last drop makes the cup run 
over.
 it’s the last straw that breaks the camel’s back
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   153 1/29/07   5:12:43 PM
154
it’s the pace that kills  Do not try to 
do too much too quickly: If you want to 
enjoy a long and happy life, you must learn 
to slow down and relax more. Remember, it’s 
the pace that kills! The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1855, with the implication 
that it was already well known in the 
sporting world.
it’s too late to shut the stable door after 
the horse has bolted  See don’t shut 
the barn door after the horse is 
stolen.
it takes a heap of living to make a house 
a home  A house or apartment does 
not feel like home until you lived there 
happily and comfortably for some time: 
It takes a heap of living to make a house a 
home—an interior designer can make it look 
good, but only you and your family can make 
it feel good. The proverb comes from the 
poem “Home” (1916) by Edgar Guest.
Variant of this proverb: it takes a 
heap of living to make a home.
it takes all kinds of people to make 
a world  Other people have different 
ways, tastes, and so on—we must practice 
tolerance and respect their individuality: 
“‘Hines was not exactly a weak sister, but 
he was sort of nondescript. I can’t imag-
ine his appealing to your wife.’ ‘It takes 
all sorts of people to make a world. You 
can never tell who is going to appeal to 
whom’” (Erle Stanley Gardner, The Case of 
the Borrowed Brunette, 1946). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1620, in a translation 
of Cervantes’s Don Quixote.
Variant of this proverb: it takes all 
sorts to make a world.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
live and let live.
it takes a thief to catch a thief  See set 
a thief to catch a thief.
it takes a village to raise a child  The 
whole community plays a part in the 
upbringing of the children that live there: 
It takes a village to raise a child, and par-
ents cannot take all the blame—or all the 
credit—for the way their kids turn out. Of 
African origin, the proverb was popular-
ized by Hillary Clinton, wife of President 
Bill Clinton, in the mid-1990s.
it takes money to make money  Any 
moneymaking scheme requires some cap-
ital investment: I’d like to set up in business 
on my own, but it takes money to make money, 
and I don’t have any.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money begets money.
it takes one to know one  Only those 
with similar fl aws are capable of spotting 
them in others: “I told him he was a liar and 
a cheat. He said it took one to know one” 
(Abigail Van Buren, The Best of Dear Abby, 
1981). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
around the end of the 19th century.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
set a thief to catch a thief.
it takes three generations to make a 
gentleman  You cannot consider your-
self a member of the gentry if your 
parents or grandparents were members 
of the common people: “You will fi nd it 
no easy matter to make a gentleman of 
him. The old proverb says, that ‘it takes 
three generations to make a gentleman’” 
(James Fenimore Cooper, The Pioneers, 
1823). The quotation is the fi rst recorded 
use of the proverb, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of much earlier origin.
it’s the pace that kills
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   154 1/29/07   5:12:43 PM
155
it takes two to make a bargain  A deal 
or treaty cannot stand unless both par-
ties are—and remain—in agreement: “I 
thought we’d agreed that I’d pay for the 
gasoline and you’d pay for the food.”  “No—you 
suggested it, but I didn’t say yes. It takes two 
to make a bargain.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1597 in the form “The second 
word makes the bargain.”
Variant of this proverb: if it takes two 
to make a bargain, it takes two to break it.
it takes two to make a quarrel  Neither 
party to an argument or dispute can be 
held individually responsible for causing 
it: Don’t let her provoke you—remember, it 
takes two to make a quarrel. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1706 in J. Stevens’s A 
New Spanish and English Dictionary.
Variant of this proverb: it takes two 
to make a quarrel, but one can end it.
it takes two to tango  In a situation 
involving cooperation or joint action, 
both participants must work together and 
share the responsibility for what happens: 
“Despite all the problems I had had with 
Imlach, and believe it or not I realize 
it takes two to tango, I wouldn’t have 
missed playing in the best league in the 
world” (B. Conacher, Hockey in Canada, 
1972). The proverb was popularized as 
the title of a song written by Al Hoffman 
and Dick Manning in 1952.
 it takes two to tango