156
a jackass can kick a barn door down, but 
it takes a carpenter to build one  Some-
thing that has taken time, skill, and effort 
to put together can be quickly ruined or 
destroyed by a foolish person: “. . . ‘any 
jackass can kick a barn door down, but it 
takes a carpenter to build one.’ Maybe the 
only sure answer to this sort of irrespon-
sibility . . . is for those who run the media 
to insure that there are more carpenters 
among today’s political commentators” 
(New York Times, 1994). The proverb was 
coined by Sam Rayburn (1882–1961), 
Speaker of the House of Representatives, 
in 1953.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: it’s easier to tear down than to 
build up.
a jack of all trades is master of 
none  Somebody who has a very wide 
range of abilities or skills usually does not 
excel at any of them: We encourage our stu-
dents to specialize at an early age, on the basis 
that a jack of all trades is master of none. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1732 in the 
form “A jack of all trades is of no trade.” It 
is perhaps most frequently encountered in 
the form of the cliché a jack of all trades.
Jack’s as good as his master  All people 
are fundamentally equal, and having a 
higher rank or status does not make one 
person better than another: “She was far 
from thinking Jack as good as his master 
and explained failure in plebeian upstarts 
by saying with suave contempt: ‘Well, 
what can you expect? Wasn’t bred to 
power’” (Winifred Holtby, South Riding, 
1936). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1706, in a Spanish/English dictionary, in 
the form “Peter is as good as his master.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: all men are created equal; when 
adam delved and eve span, who was 
then the gentleman?
jam tomorrow and jam yesterday, but 
never jam today Good times always 
seem to belong to the past or to the 
future, but never to the present: She 
promised us she would pay us more when 
things improved, but with her it’s always “jam 
tomorrow.” The proverb appears to have 
made its fi rst appearance in Through the 
Looking-Glass (1871) by Lewis Carroll: 
“‘The rule is, jam to-morrow and jam 
yesterday—but never jam to-day.’ ‘It must 
come sometimes to “jam to-day,”’ Alice 
objected. ‘No, it can’t,’ said the Queen.”
jesters do oft prove prophets  A predic-
tion made in jest often comes true: I was only 
joking when I said that Tom and Jenny, who never 
j.
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   156 1/29/07   5:12:43 PM
157
stopped arguing, were bound to end up marrying 
each other, but jesters do oft prove prophets, and 
I’ve just received an invitation to their wedding. 
The proverb comes from Shakespeare’s play 
King Lear (5:3) in the words of Regan: “Jest-
ers do oft prove prophets.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
many a true word is spoken in jest.
a journey of a thousand miles begins 
with one step  Do not be put off by the 
magnitude of the task ahead of you—the 
important thing is to make a start: As they 
set out from home on their round-the-world 
trip they recalled the proverb “A journey of 
a thousand miles begins with one step.” The 
proverb is attributed to the Chinese phi-
losopher Lao-tzu (c. 604–c. 531 b.c.), 
founder of Taoism.
Variant of this proverb: the longest 
journey begins with a single step.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the first step is the hardest.
Jove but laughs at lovers’ perjury  The 
breaking of oaths and promises made 
158
by lovers is so commonplace that it 
is not regarded as a serious matter: 
“Perjury in the Divorce Court has been 
openly permitted to the upper classes 
for many years, following the maxim 
. . . that ‘Jove but laughs at lovers’ per-
jury’” (London Evening Standard, 1922). 
Of ancient origin, the proverb occurs in 
the writings of the Roman poet Tibullus 
(c. 48–19 b.c.): “periuria ridet amantum 
Iuppiter [Jupiter laughs at lovers’ perju-
ries].” It is also found in Shakespeare’s 
play Romeo and Juliet (2:2) “At lovers’ 
perjuries,/They say, Jove laughs” and in 
John Dryden’s poem Palamon and Arcite 
(1700): “Fool, not to know that love 
endures no tie,/And Jove but laughs at 
lovers’ perjury.”
the joy of the heart makes the face 
fair  See a merry heart makes a cheer-
ful countenance.
judge and you shall be judged  See 
judge not, that ye be not judged.
judge not, that ye be not judged  If 
you make a habit of judging and criticiz-
ing others, they will subject you to the 
same treatment in return: She’s not the best 
player in the team, but we all have our faults. 
“Judge not, that ye be not judged,” is my motto. 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Judge 
not, that ye be not judged. For with what 
judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: 
and with what measure ye mete, it shall 
be measured to you again” (Matthew 
7:1–2).
Variant of this proverb: judge and 
you shall be judged.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: people who live in glass houses 
shouldn’t throw stones.
judge not according to appearances 
Do not make a judgment about some-
thing or somebody on the basis of out-
ward appearance alone: “She wore . . . 
every appearance of innocence, but in her 
person she illustrated the truth of the old 
adage that one should not judge by appear-
ances” (M. Williams, Leaves of a Life, 1890). 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Judge 
not according to the appearance, but 
judge righteous judgment” (John 7:24).
Variant of this proverb: never judge 
by appearances.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: appearances are deceiving; the 
cowl does not make the monk; don’t 
judge a book by its cover; a good 
horse cannot be of a bad color.
justice is blind  Justice must be dis-
pensed with objectivity and without 
regard to irrelevant details or circum-
stances: “Justice is supposed to be blind; 
the color of a person’s skin should not 
determine their guilt or innocence” (Oli-
ver L. North, Under Fire, 1991). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1663 in John 
Dryden’s The Wild Gallant.
the joy of the heart makes the face fair