159
keep a thing seven years and you’ll fi nd 
a use for it  An object that seems useless 
now may be just what you need at some 
future time, so do not discard it: I have 
a drawer full of odds and ends that I cannot 
bring myself to throw away, on the basis that if 
you keep a thing seven years you’ll fi nd a use 
for it. The proverb was fi rst recorded, with 
different wording, in 1566 in William 
Painter’s Palace of Pleasure.
Variant of this proverb: keep a thing 
seven years and it’s bound to come in 
handy.
keep no more cats than will catch 
mice  Do not support any members of 
your family or household who cannot earn 
their keep: The new president’s policy is to keep 
no more cats than will catch mice, so some of the 
less productive members of staff are likely to lose 
their jobs. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1673 in J. Dare’s Counsellor Manners.
keep your eyes wide open before mar-
riage, half shut afterward  You should 
choose your husband or wife with care, 
but be prepared to overlook his or her 
faults after the wedding day: They say that 
you should keep your eyes wide open before 
marriage and half shut afterward, but there 
are limits to what even the most tolerant wife 
will put up with. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1738, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
keep your mouth shut and your eyes 
open  A recipe for success in many walks 
of life is to speak only when necessary and 
to remain alert, observant, and watch-
ful at all times: On your fi rst day at work, 
remember the proverb “Keep your mouth shut 
and your eyes open”—don’t say anything that 
could land you in trouble, and pay attention 
to everything that’s going on around you. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, in its variant 
form, in 1581.
Variant of this proverb: keep your 
mouth shut and your ears open.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
hear all, see all, say nowt.
keep your shop and your shop will keep 
you  If you run a business effi ciently, the 
profi ts will provide you with a comfort-
able income: Whenever anybody accused him 
of paying more attention to his business than to 
his family, my uncle would argue that he had 
his family’s interests at heart, on the basis of 
the saying “Keep your shop and your shop will 
keep you.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1605. The U.S. actress Mae West paro-
died the proverb when she said “Keep a 
diary and some day it’ll keep you” in the 
movie Every Day’s a Holiday (1937).
k
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   159 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
160
killing no murder Sometimes circum-
stances make extreme actions forgiv-
able: Her grandfather appeared to be of the 
opinion that when it came to politicians and 
journalists it was a case of  “killing no murder.” 
The proverb fi rst appeared as the title of 
the Royalist pamphlet Killing Noë Murder 
(1657), which called for the assassination 
of the Lord Protector, Oliver Cromwell.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
desperate diseases must have desperate 
remedies.
kind hearts are more than coronets 
Kindness and compassion are of greater 
value than noble birth: She discovered 
a number of aristocratic ancestors in her 
genealogical research, but her husband was 
not impressed. “Kind hearts are more than 
coronets,” he said. The proverb comes from 
Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s poem “Lady 
Clara Vere de Vere” (1833): “Howe’er 
it be, it seems to me,/’Tis only noble 
to be good,/Kind hearts are more than 
coronets,/And simple faith than Nor-
man blood.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: better a good cow than a cow of 
good kind.
the king can do no wrong  People in 
authority are not bound by the rules and 
regulations that apply to others; specifi -
cally, a monarch is above the law: If one of 
us had made such a careless and potentially 
dangerous mistake, we would have faced dis-
missal, but he’s the boss, and the king can do 
no wrong. The proverb dates from before 
1654 and is a translation of the Latin 
legal maxim “Rex no potest peccare.” The 
word king may be replaced by queen, with 
specifi c reference to a female monarch, 
or by the name of some other person or 
institution considered to be exempt from 
punishment or criticism.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: nobody is above the law.
kings have long arms  Few people, 
places, or things are beyond the reach of 
those in authority, and it is not easy for 
an offender to escape capture or punish-
ment: Even if you manage to get across the 
border, your safety is not guaranteed—kings 
have long arms, you know. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1539, but 
the sentiment it expresses dates back 
to ancient times. Compare Ovid (43 
b.c.–a.d. 18): “an nescis longas regibus esse 
manus? [know you not that kings have far-
reaching hands?]”
Variant of this proverb: governments 
have long arms.
kissing goes by favor  People often 
bestow honors and privileges on those 
they like, rather than on those who are 
most worthy of them: She was probably the 
least suitable candidate for the post, but kissing 
goes by favor, and nobody was surprised to hear 
that she had been appointed. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1616 in Thomas 
Draxe’s Adages.
knock on wood  See touch wood.
knowledge and timber shouldn’t be much 
used until they are seasoned  Knowl-
edge is not useful until it is tempered by 
experience: Newly qualifi ed police offi cers 
can be a danger to themselves and to the 
general public unless they remember the say-
ing “Knowledge and timber shouldn’t be much 
used until they are seasoned.” The proverb 
comes from Oliver Wendell Holmes’s The 
Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table (1858).
killing no murder
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   160 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
161
knowledge and wisdom are far from 
being one  Knowledgeable people may 
lack the wisdom to make sound judg-
ments: One might expect such scholarly and 
learned members of society to behave with a 
little more common sense, but knowledge and 
wisdom are far from being one. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1783.
knowledge is power  Those who have 
knowledge can control or infl uence those 
who do not; sometimes used of a specifi c 
piece of information that gives one person 
an advantage over others: “Of a truth, 
Knowledge is power, but it is a power 
reined by scruple, having a conscience of 
what must be and what may be” (George 
Eliot, Daniel Deronda, 1876). The proverb is 
often attributed to the English philosopher 
Francis Bacon, who wrote “Knowledge 
itself is power” in his Religious Meditations 
(1597). The sentiment it expresses, how-
ever, is of biblical origin: “A man of knowl-
edge increaseth strength” (Proverbs 24:5).
know thyself  Be aware of your own 
strengths and weaknesses: “Know then 
thyself, presume not God to scan;/The 
proper study of Mankind is Man” (Alex-
ander Pope, Essay on Man, 1732). The 
proverb dates from the sixth century b.c., 
when it was inscribed in Greek on the 
temple of Apollo at Delphi. It was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1387.
 know thyself