162
the laborer is worthy of his hire  Those 
who work for others are entitled to be paid 
for their efforts: “Your service will not be 
altogether gratuitous, my old friend—the 
labourer is worthy of his hire” (Sir Walter 
Scott, St. Ronan’s Well, 1824). The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “And in the same 
house remain, eating and drinking such 
things as they give: for the labourer is 
worthy of his hire” (Luke 10:7).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good dog deserves a good bone.
the larger the body, the bigger the 
heart  Large people are reputed to be 
kinder and more generous than others: 
He was a smiling, rosy-cheeked mountain of a 
man, dearly loved by all who knew him, and a 
walking illustration of the proverb “The larger 
the body, the bigger the heart.” The proverb 
is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the best things come in small 
packages.
last but not least  A person or thing 
that is not any the less important because 
listed last: “Though last, not least in 
love” (William Shakespeare, Julius Caesar). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1580 
in John Lyly’s Euphuist and his England: 
“Of these three but one can stand me in 
steede, the last, but not the least.”
the last drop makes the cup run 
over  One fi nal additional thing may 
push a person beyond his or her limit 
of tolerance or endurance: The last drop 
makes the cup run over, and when they asked 
me to cut down the tree because it was casting 
a shadow on their children’s play area, my 
patience fi nally snapped. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1855, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier ori-
gin. In his Church History of Britain (1655), 
Thomas Fuller wrote, “When the Cup is 
brim full before, the last (though least) 
superadded drop is charged alone to be 
the cause of all the running over.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s the last straw that breaks the 
camel’s back.
the last straw will break the camel’s 
back  See it’s the last straw that 
breaks the camel’s back.
late children, early orphans  Children 
born to older parents run a greater risk of 
being orphaned before they reach adult-
hood: She disapproved of our decision to 
have another baby, quoting the proverb “Late 
children, early orphans,” but I pointed out that 
l
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   162 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
163
human life expectancy had increased consider-
ably since the saying was coined.
laugh and grow fat  Cheerfulness and 
merrymaking are good for your health: 
Those seeking a recipe for a long, happy, 
healthy life need look no further than the old 
saying “Laugh and grow fat.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1596 in Sir John 
Harington’s Metamorphosis of Ajax.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
laughter is the best medicine.
laugh and the world laughs with you, 
weep and you weep alone  Cheerful 
people never lack company, but miserable 
people are shunned by others: A happy face 
often hides a sorrowful heart—most people learn 
at an early age the wisdom of the proverb “Laugh 
and the world laughs with you, weep and you 
weep alone.” The current form of the proverb 
comes from Ella Wheeler Wilcox’s poem 
Solitude (1883): “Laugh, and the world 
laughs with you;/Weep, and you weep 
alone./For the sad old earth must borrow 
its mirth,/But has trouble enough of its 
own.” The sentiment it expresses, however, 
is found in the writings of the Roman poet 
Horace (65–8 b.c.): “ut ridentibus arrident, 
ita fl entibus adsunt humani voltus [men’s faces 
laugh on those who laugh, and correspond-
ingly weep on those who weep].”
laugh before breakfast, cry before sunset 
See sing before breakfast, cry before 
night.
laughter is the best medicine  Laughing 
is an excellent remedy for disorders of 
the body or mind: She belongs to a group of 
performers who visit local hospitals to entertain 
the patients with humorous sketches, on the 
basis that laughter is the best medicine.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
laugh and grow fat.
lawmakers should not be lawbreakers 
Legislators should abide by the laws they 
make: Lawmakers should not be lawbreakers—
congressmen and congresswomen are expected 
to set an example to their fellow citizens. The 
fi rst recorded use is c. 1386 in Geoffrey 
Chaucer’s Man of Law’s Tale.
laws go as kings like  Laws are made by 
those in power: The opposition can complain 
as much as they like, but laws go as kings like. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1885 in 
J. Ormsby’s Quixote.
learn from the mistakes of others  Ob-
serve the mistakes that other people 
make and try not to repeat them your-
self: The best way to succeed in this com-
petitive world is not to do something before 
anybody else, but to learn from the mistakes 
of others and do it better than everybody else. 
The sentiment expressed by the proverb 
is of ancient origin: the Roman dramatist 
Plautus (c. 254–184 b.c.) wrote, “Feliciter 
is sapit qui periculo alieno sapit [He is happy 
in his wisdom, who is wise at the expense 
of another].”
Variant of this proverb: Wise men 
learn by other men’s mistakes, fools by 
their own.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
experience is the teacher of fools.
learning is better than house or 
land  Education and knowledge are of 
greater value than property ownership: 
Learning is better than house or land, and my 
parents saw to it that I had suffi cient schooling 
to make up for my lack of inherited wealth. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1773, 
 learning is better than house or land
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   163 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
164
in David Garrick’s prologue to Oliver 
Goldsmith’s play She Stoops to Conquer.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: when house and land are gone 
and spent, then learning is most 
excellent.
least said, soonest mended  The less you 
say, the less likely you are to cause trou-
ble; often used to discourage somebody 
from complaining, apologizing, arguing, 
or making excuses: “If you defend, you’ll 
have to go up to London. In the box, 
least said is soonest mended. You’ll sim-
ply say you found you were mistaken, 
and thought it more honourable to break 
off at once than to go on” (John Gals-
worthy, A Feud, 1930). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, c. 
1460. It was parodied by the U.S. writer 
Ambrose Bierce in his Devil’s Dictionary 
(1911): “Least said is soonest disavowed.”
Variant of this proverb: the least said 
is the easiest mended.
leave no stone unturned  Leave no pos-
sibility unchecked: The police left no stone 
unturned looking for evidence. The proverb 
appears in the writings of Euripedes and 
Pliny and was first recorded in English 
c. 1550 in Dice-Play.
leave off while the play is good  See quit 
while you are ahead.
leave well enough alone  Do not try to 
change or improve something that is sat-
isfactory as it stands: “‘I’m going to him,’ 
Nicole got to her knees. ‘No, you’re not,’ 
said Tommy, pulling her down fi rmly. ‘Let 
well enough alone’” (F. Scott Fitzgerald, 
Tender Is the Night, 1934). The proverb is 
of ancient origin.
Variant of this proverb: let well 
alone.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.
lend your money and lose your 
friend  You risk losing your friends 
by lending them money, either because 
they fail to repay the loan or because 
they resent being asked to repay it: It’s 
not that I don’t want to help you out of 
your fi nancial crisis, and it’s not that I don’t 
have the money, but I value your friendship 
too highly. Have you never heard the saying 
“Lend your money and lose your friend”? The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with differ-
ent wording, in 1474. Similar advice is 
to be found in Shakespeare’s play Hamlet 
(1:3), “Neither a borrower not a lender 
be;/For loan oft loses both itself and 
friend.”
Variant of this proverb: Lend money 
and you get an enemy.
length begets loathing  Nobody likes a 
long-winded speaker or writer: Remember 
that length begets loathing, and keep your 
opening remarks short and to the point. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1742 in C. 
Jarvis’s Don Quixote.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
brevity is the soul of wit.
the leopard can’t change its spots  A 
person cannot change his or her char-
acter or nature: “Although he swears 
he has changed, leopards don’t usually 
change their spots, especially those who 
don’t cooperate in counseling” (Washing-
ton Times, 1997). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “Can the Ethiopian change his 
skin, or the leopard his spots?” (Jeremiah 
13:23).
least said, soonest mended
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   164 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
165
Variant of this proverb: The leopard 
does not change his spots.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
once a thief, always a thief; you can 
drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back.
less is more  A work of art, piece of 
writing, or other creative endeavor can be 
made more elegant or effective by reduc-
ing ornamentation and avoiding excess: 
Her motto was “Less is more,” and the simple 
lines of the furniture she designed began a 
new trend for minimalism. The proverb is 
associated with the U.S. architect Ludwig 
Mies van der Rohe (1886–1969) but was 
not coined by him: it was fi rst recorded 
in English in Robert Browning’s poem 
“Andrea del Sarto” (1855).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the half is better than the whole.
let bygones be bygones  Put the past 
behind you, make a fresh start, and do 
not bear grudges against those who have 
wronged you: “Into every real friendship 
a little rain must fall. . . . Let’s go and get 
the men and drink a friendship cup and 
let bygones be bygones” (John Cheever, 
The Wapshot Chronicle, 1957). The prov-
erb dates from before 1577 in the form 
“Bygones to be bygones.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: forgive and forget.
let him who is without sin cast the fi rst 
stone  Only those who are truly virtu-
ous have the right to criticize or condemn 
others; used to imply that nobody has this 
right: I accept that what she did was wrong, 
but most of us have done similar things in our 
time—let him who is without sin cast the fi rst 
stone. The proverb is of biblical origin: “He 
that is without sin among you, let him 
fi rst cast a stone at her [a woman taken in 
adultery]” ( John 8:7).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
nobody is perfect.
let not the sun go down on your 
wrath  See never let the sun go down 
on your anger.
let sleeping dogs lie  Do not cause trou-
ble by disturbing a stable—but potentially 
problematic—situation: “Take my advice, 
and speer [ask] as little about him as he does 
about you. Best to let sleeping dogs lie” (Sir 
Walter Scott, Redgauntlet, 1824). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded c. 1385 in Chaucer’s 
Troilus and Criseyde, in the form “It is nought 
good a slepyng hound to wake.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t rock the boat; never trou-
ble trouble till trouble troubles you.
let the buyer beware  It is the buyer’s 
responsibility to check the quality or 
nature of goods or services before pur-
chasing them; a legal principle in some 
types of transaction, and also used as a 
general warning to anybody making or 
considering a purchase: The streets of the 
old town are lined with colorful market stalls, 
but tourists who are tempted by the goods on 
display would do well to remember the saying 
“Let the buyer beware.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1523 in J. Fitzherbert’s 
Husbandry. It is often used in the Latin 
form “Caveat emptor.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the buyer needs a thousand eyes, the 
seller wants but one.
let the chips fall where they may  Pay 
no attention to the possible consequences 
 let the chips fall where they may
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   165 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
166
of your actions, and carry on regard-
less: “This is one area where Mr. Jacoby 
admits to a certain reckless disregard for 
practical consequences, saying that he 
has, perhaps foolishly, ‘let the chips fall 
where they may’” (New York Times, 1987). 
The proverb comes from a speech made 
by U.S. senator Roscoe Conkling in 1880: 
“He [Ulysses S. Grant] will hew to the line 
of right, let the chips fl y where they may.” 
Chips are small, thin pieces of wood: the 
woodcutter carries on with his task, dis-
regarding any chips that are thrown up in 
his process of hewing.
let the cobbler stick to his last  People 
should not offer advice, make criticisms, 
or otherwise interfere in matters outside 
their own area of knowledge or expertise: 
I’m sick and tired of accountants from the city 
telling me how to farm my own land—let the 
cobbler stick to his last. Of ancient origin, 
the proverb comes from a story about 
the Greek painter Apelles (fourth century 
b.c.), who permitted a certain cobbler 
to point out a mistake in the way he had 
painted a shoe but would not tolerate his 
criticism of other parts of the painting. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in 1539, in the form “Let not the shoe-
maker go beyond his shoe.”
Variants of this proverb: The cobbler 
should stick to his last; the cobbler to his 
last and the gunner to his linstock.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every man to his trade.
let the dead bury the dead  Do not con-
cern yourself with things that are past and 
gone: “Let, then, the dead bury the dead. 
The task for us is to rejuvenate ourselves 
and our subject” (J. S. Huxley, What Dare 
I Think?, 1931). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “And another of his disciples said 
unto him, Lord, suffer me fi rst to go and 
bury my father. But Jesus said unto him, 
Follow me; and let the dead bury their 
dead” (Matthew 8:21–22).
let them laugh that win  Do not rejoice 
until you are certain of victory or success: 
Let them laugh that win—the battle is still far 
from over. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1546 in John Heywood’s Dialogue of 
Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: the winners 
laugh, the losers weep.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he who laughs last, laughs longest.
let well alone  See leave well enough 
alone.
let your head save your heels  You can 
avoid wasted journeys on foot by careful 
planning or forethought, such as by com-
bining errands: If you had put the drinks on a 
tray, you could have saved yourself at least two 
trips to the kitchen. Will you never learn to let 
your head save your heels? The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1828 in W. Carr’s Dialect 
of Craven.
Variant of this proverb: use your 
head and save your feet.
a liar is not believed when he tells the 
truth  There is no way of knowing when 
somebody with a reputation for lying is 
telling the truth: She was an attention-
seeker, known for wasting police time with 
tall stories about muggings and burglaries. 
So she had only herself to blame when her 
genuine complaint about the stalker was not 
taken seriously—a liar is not believed when 
he tells the truth. The proverb occurs in 
the writings of Aristotle and Cicero. 
let the cobbler stick to his last
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   166 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
167
The sentiment it expresses can be found 
in one of the fables of Aesop (sixth cen-
tury b.c.), about a shepherd boy who 
repeatedly cries “Wolf!” when his sheep 
are not in danger, and whose cries are 
therefore ignored when the wolf fi nally 
appears.
Variant of this proverb: nobody 
believes a liar when he speaks the truth.
a liar is worse than a thief  People who 
lie are even less trustworthy than people 
who thieve: “But sure the proverbe is as 
true as briefe,/A lyer’s ever worse then 
a thiefe” (John Taylor, All the Workes of John 
Taylor, the Water Poet, 1630). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1623 in W. Painter’s 
Chaucer New Painted.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
show me a liar and i will show you 
a thief.
a liar should have a good memory  Li-
ars must remember the untruths they 
have told, to avoid contradicting them-
selves at some later date: “They say a 
liar has to have a good memory. In that 
case, Mr. Reagan’s testimony is proof 
of his honesty” (Washington Times, 1990). 
The proverb occurs in the writings of 
Quintilian (c. a.d. 35–c. 100). It was 
fi rst recorded in English, in its current 
form, c. 1690.
liberty is not licence [license]  Freedom 
does not mean that a person can what-
ever he or she wants: As far as his wife is 
concerned, he is allowed to go out and enjoy 
himself, but he knows very well that liberty 
is not licence. The proverb is a quotation 
from Sonnet vii, written by John Milton 
in 1645: “Licence they mean when they 
cry liberty.”
a lie can go around the world and back 
again while the truth is lacing up its 
boots  False rumors travel with alarm-
ing speed: A lie can go around the world 
and back again while the truth is lacing up 
its boots, and if the media get hold of the 
idea that you are guilty, you will have a hard 
job subsequently proving your innocence. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1859, but 
with the implication that it had long been 
in general use. The sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient origin.
Variant of this proverb: a lie is half-
way around the world before the truth has 
got its boots on.
life begins at forty  Your middle years 
can be the best time of your life, and 
many people make a fresh start or take a 
renewed interest in life at this time: “All 
our age benchmarks, which used to seem 
solid as rocks, have turned into shifting 
sands. “Life Begins at 40? More like 60” 
(New York Times, 1991). The proverb dates 
from 1932, when it was used as the title 
of a book by the U.S. writer Walter B. 
Pitkin. In the text of the book Pitkin pre-
dicted its future proverbial status: “Life 
begins at forty. . . . Today it is half a truth. 
Tomorrow it will be an axiom.”
life is hard by the yard, but by the inch 
life’s a cinch  Life is less overwhelming 
if you take it one step at a time: A diffi cult 
time lay ahead, but I drew strength from the 
saying: “Life is hard by the yard, but by the inch 
life’s a cinch.” The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression the United States.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one step at a time.
life is just a bowl of cherries  Life is 
pleasant and carefree; said when things 
 life is just a bowl of cherries
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   167 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
168
are going well, or ironically when things 
are going badly: She looked back nostalgi-
cally on the days when she was young and 
single, and life was just a bowl of cherries. The 
proverb dates from 1931, when it was 
used as the title of a song by Lew Brown 
and Ray Henderson. In 1978 the Ameri-
can humorist Erma Bombeck wrote a 
book entitled If Life Is Just a Bowl of Cher-
ries,  What Am I Doing in the Pits?
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: life is no bed of roses; life isn’t 
all beer and skittles.
life is no bed of roses  Do not expect 
life to be easy and pleasant; often used 
of life in a particular situation or with a 
particular person: Everybody knows that life 
is no bed of roses in the armed forces, but new 
recruits are often horrifi ed to learn just how 
hard they are expected to work. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1780.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
life isn’t all beer and skittles.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: life is just a bowl of cherries.
life isn’t all beer and skittles  You can-
not always be enjoying yourself: “Life 
isn’t all beer and skittles, but beer and 
skittles, or something better of the 
same sort, must form a good part of 
every Englishman’s education” (Thomas 
Hughes, Tom Brown’s Schooldays, 1857). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in the 
19th century, when drinking beer and 
playing skittles (a bowling game) were 
popular leisure activities among British 
working men.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
life is no bed of roses.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: life is just a bowl of cherries.
life is short and sweet  Life seems all 
the more pleasurable for being brief in 
duration: Life is short and sweet, but not 
for some of the aged residents of hospitals in 
countries where euthanasia remains illegal. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1802 
in Port Folio.
Variant of this proverb: life is sweet.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: life’s a bitch, and then you die.
life is short and time is swift  Time 
passes too quickly for us to waste any 
moment of our short lives: He tried to cram 
as much as possible into his waking hours, on 
the basis of the proverb “Life is short and time 
is swift.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
seize the day.
life is sweet  See life is short and 
sweet.
life is too short  We must make the most 
of our short lives, and not waste time on 
trivial things: I have no patience with people 
who fall out with their friends or relatives over 
some petty issue and don’t speak to them for 
months or years on end—life is too short!
Variant of this proverb: life is too 
short to be little.
life is what you make it  You have only 
yourself to blame if your life does not turn 
out as you would have liked it to: I believe 
that life is what you make it, and there is no point 
in sitting around complaining about your lack of 
good fortune. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1897 in the writings of the American phi-
losopher and psychologist William James.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every man is the architect of his own 
fortune.
life is no bed of roses
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   168 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
169
life’s a bitch, and then you die  Life is 
full of unpleasantness and injustice: “It’s not 
fair, Dad—I have to do all the hard jobs around 
the house, and Kate gets all the easy ones.” “I 
know, son—life’s a bitch, and then you die.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: life is short and sweet.
light come, light go  See easy come, 
easy go.
light gains make heavy purses  It is 
possible to become rich by making small 
profi ts: They took a tiny percentage of each 
item sold, but light gains make heavy purses if 
there are enough of them. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in J. Heywood’s 
A Dialogue containing . . . the Proverbs in the 
English Tongue.
Variant of this proverb: light win-
nings make heavy purses.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
take care of the pennies and the dol-
lars will take care of themselves.
lightning never strikes twice in the same 
place  The same unpleasant or unexpected 
phenomenon will not recur in the same 
place or circumstances, or happen to the 
same person again; a superstition that often 
leads to a false sense of security: “They did 
not hit me at all. . . . Lightning never strikes 
twice in the same place, nor cannon balls 
either, I presume” (P. H. Myers, The Prisoner 
of the Border, 1857). The quotation is the 
fi rst recorded use of the proverb.
Variant of this proverb: lightning 
never strikes the same place twice.
a light purse makes a heavy heart  Those 
who have little money are anxious and 
troubled: The careworn faces of the unem-
ployed are a graphic illustration of the saying 
“A light purse makes a heavy heart.”  The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1555 by 
J. Heywood.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a heavy purse makes a light heart.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: money can’t buy happiness.
light winnings make heavy purses  See 
light gains make heavy purses.
like attracts like  Similar people tend to 
be drawn to one another: Like attracts like, 
so it seemed inevitable that they would become 
friends. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English c. 1375, but with the implication 
that it was already in general use. The senti-
ment it expresses is of ancient origin, and is 
found in Homer’s Odyssey (c. eighth century 
b.c.): “the god always brings like to like.”
Variant of this proverb: like will to 
like.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
birds of a feather flock together.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: opposites attract.
like breeds like  People are infl uenced 
by others and tend to behave in the same 
way; also used to imply that one thing 
will lead to something similar: “Like men, 
like manners:/Like breeds like, they say” 
(Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Poems, 1842). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1557 
(Roger Edgeworth, Sermons) in the form 
“Like makes like.” It is sometimes inter-
preted with literal reference to parents 
and their offspring.
Variant of this proverb: like begets 
like.
like cures like  The best remedy for a 
disease or affl iction is something that is 
 like cures like
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   169 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
170
capable of causing the same condition; 
the motto of homeopathic medicine: “On 
the homeopathic principle of ‘like cures 
like,’ a cigar was the best preventative 
against . . . smoke” (Cuthbert Bede, Ver-
dant Green, 1853). The proverb is associ-
ated with the German physician Samuel 
Hahnemann (1755–1843), the founder 
of homeopathy. It also exists in the Latin 
form “Similia similibus curantur.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: fight fire with fire; take a hair 
of the dog that bit you.
like father, like son  Sons tend to resem-
ble their fathers in character and behavior; 
often used to draw attention to such a 
similarity: We weren’t surprised to learn 
that he had developed an alcohol problem—
like father, like son. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1340 in the form “Ill sons 
follow ill fathers.”
Variant of this proverb: as is the 
father, so is the son.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the apple never falls far from 
the tree; like mother, like daugh-
ter.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: beauty is no inheritance.
like master, like man  Servants and other 
workers tend to follow the good or bad 
example set by their employers: I don’t 
trust him—the person he works for is a rogue 
and a swindler, and like master, like man. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1530 in the form “Such master such man.” 
The sentiment it expresses is of ancient 
origin, and is found in Petronius’s Satyri-
con (fi rst century a.d.): “qualis dominus, 
talis et servus [as is the master, so is the 
servant].”
Variant of this proverb: an ill master 
makes an ill servant.
like mother, like daughter  Daughters 
tend to resemble their mothers in char-
acter and behavior; often used to draw 
attention to such a similarity: “It’s a case 
of like mother, like daughter—they’re 
not the kind of women who forgive and 
forget, I’ll tell you that” (Michael Korda, 
Queenie, 1985). The proverb is of bibli-
cal origin: “Behold, every one that useth 
proverbs shall use this proverb against 
thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her 
daughter” (Ezekiel 16:44).
Variant of this proverb: as is the 
mother, so is the daughter.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the apple never falls far from the 
tree; like father, like son.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: beauty is no inheritance.
like people, like priest  The quality of 
a spiritual leader can be judged by the 
behavior of his or her followers: “He had 
so deep a reverence for the clergy, that it 
never entered into his mind that perhaps, 
after all, it was ‘like people, like priest’” 
(Richard Heath, The English Peasant, 1893). 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “And 
there shall be, like people, like priest: 
and I will punish them for their ways, and 
reward them their doings” (Hosea 4:9).
Variant of this proverb: like priest, 
like people.
like will to like  See like attracts like.
the lion is not so fi erce as he is painted 
Some people have reputations that far 
exceed their real characters: Many of 
the staff were nervous about meeting the new 
like father, like son
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   170 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
171
headteacher, but it turned out that the lion 
was not so fi erce as he had been painted. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1599 in R. 
Percyvall’s A Spanish Grammar, now aug-
mented . . . by J. Minsheu.
listeners never hear any good of them-
selves  People who eavesdrop on the 
conversations of others risk hearing unfa-
vorable comments about themselves; used 
as a warning or reprimand: Come away from 
that door—you know what they are talking 
about in there, and listeners never hear any 
good of themselves. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1647 in the form “Hearkeners 
never hear good of themselves.”
Variant of this proverb: eavesdrop-
pers hear no good of themselves.
a little absence does much good  A 
short period of absence can have a sur-
prisingly benefi cial effect: It might be 
better, both for you and for your workforce, 
if you didn’t visit the factory every single 
day. Remember the saying “A little absence 
does much good.” The proverb is recorded 
as a regional expression in the United 
States.
LITERARY PROVERBS
A signifi cant number of proverbs in regular use today have their origins in the writings of a 
particular author. The following selection identifi es just a few familiar proverbs as the contri-
butions of specifi c writers.
The best is yet to be (Browning)
The best-laid schemes of mice and men gang oft aglay (Burns)
Blessed is he who expects nothing, for he shall never be disappointed (Pope)
Brevity is the soul of wit (Shakespeare)
Cowards die many times before their deaths (Shakespeare)
To err is human; to forgive, divine (Pope)
Fools rush in where angels fear to tread (Pope)
Frailty, thy name is woman! (Shakespeare)
Gather ye rosebuds while ye may (Herrick)
God’s in his heaven —all’s right with the world (Browning)
Hope springs eternal (Pope)
A little learning is a dangerous thing (Pope)
Neither a borrower nor a lender be (Shakespeare)
Ours not to reason why (Tennyson)
A rose by any other name would smell as sweet (Shakespeare)
Self-praise is no recommendation (Dickens)
Sweet are the uses of adversity (Shakespeare)
There is a divinity that shapes our ends (Shakespeare)
A thing of beauty is a joy for ever (Keats)
Where ignorance is bliss, ’tis folly to be wise (Gray)
ååååå
 a little absence does much good
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   171 1/29/07   5:12:46 PM
172
little and often fi lls the purse  A small 
but regular income will provide you with all 
the money you need; also applied to small 
amounts saved regularly: Little and often fi lls 
the purse, and by putting away just ten dollars a 
week I managed to accumulate a substantial nest 
egg. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1582 
in S. Gosson’s Plays Confuted.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
many a little makes a mickle.
little birds that can sing and won’t sing 
must be made to sing  Those who refuse 
to tell what they know must be forced 
to do so; also interpreted more literally: 
“When the disdainful oligarchs declined to 
join in the songs . . . the great Republican 
leader, with his rough humour, said the 
words which are written in gold upon his 
monument, ‘Little birds that can sing and 
won’t sing, must be made to sing’” (G. K. 
Chesterton, Napoleon of Notting Hill, 1904). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1678 in 
John Ray’s A Collection of English Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: the bird that 
can sing and won’t sing should be made 
to sing.
little boats should stay close to 
shore  Do not take large risks if you 
have limited resources: We are only a small 
company, and little boats should stay close to 
shore—we dare not risk investing in such an 
uncertain enterprise. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1751, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Variant of this proverb: great boats 
may venture more, but little boats should 
keep near shore.
little drops of water, little grains of 
sand, make a mighty ocean and a pleas-
ant land  Nothing is too small to be 
of value: All contributions, however small, 
will be gratefully received and put to good 
use—little drops of water, little grains of sand, 
make a mighty ocean and a pleasant land. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1845 
in Julia A. Carney’s Little Things.
Variant of this proverb: many drops 
of water make an ocean.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every little helps.
little fi sh are sweet  The smallest things 
are sometimes the most desirable or 
acceptable; used specifi cally of some-
thing received, bought, or otherwise 
acquired: “‘They’ll sell at a loss,’ he 
went on, with a sigh, ‘but sure, little 
fi sh is sweet! and the rent has to be 
made up’” (K. F. Purdon, The Folk of 
Furry Farm, 1914). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1830 in R. Forby’s Vocabu-
lary of East Anglia.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
small is beautiful.
a little knowledge is a dangerous 
thing  It is often better to have no 
knowledge of something than to have 
incomplete or inadequate knowledge, 
which can lead to false confi dence, wrong 
judgments, and disastrous mistakes: Peo-
ple who try to treat major injuries after a 
few lessons in fi rst aid can do more harm 
than good—a little knowledge is a danger-
ous thing. Of ancient origin, the proverb 
takes its current form from Alexander 
Pope’s Essay on Criticism (1711): “A little 
learning is a dang’rous thing;/ Drink 
deep, or taste not the Pierian spring” and 
is sometimes regarded as a misquotation. 
In his essay “Science and Culture,” writ-
ten in 1877, Thomas Huxley asked: “If a 
little knowledge is dangerous, where is 
little and often fi lls the purse
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   172 1/29/07   5:12:46 PM
173
the man who has so much as to be out 
of danger?”
Variant of this proverb: a little learn-
ing is a dangerous thing.
little leaks sink the ship  Small and 
apparently insignifi cant expenses can 
mount up to major sums and cause seri-
ous fi nancial problems: “Surely you can 
afford to give me a few dollars.” “Maybe I 
can, but little leaks sink the ship, and if I gave 
handouts to everybody who asked for them, 
I’d soon be ruined.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1616 in the form “It is a little 
leak that drowns a ship.”
Variant of this proverb: small leaks 
sink big ships.
a little learning is a dangerous thing  See 
a little knowledge is a dangerous 
thing.
a little of what you fancy does you 
good  It is benefi cial to indulge yourself 
from time to time: She popped another choc-
olate in her mouth, telling herself that a little 
of what you fancy does you good. The prov-
erb comes from a music hall song of the 
same title that became well known in the 
1890s, especially as sung by Marie Lloyd. 
The original implication was sexual, but it 
may now refer to any number of more or 
less illicit pleasures.
little pitchers have big ears  Children 
miss little of what is said in their hearing; 
often used as a warning: I thought the kids 
were engrossed in their computer game, but 
little pitchers have big ears, and the story was 
all over the school by the end of the next day. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in 
the form “Small pitchers have wide ears.” 
It occurs in Shakespeare’s play Richard III 
(2:4): “Good madam, be not angry with 
the child. Pitchers have ears.”
a little pot is soon hot  Small people 
are reputed to be more easily angered 
than others: A little pot is soon hot, and the 
staff soon learned to stay on the right side of 
the diminutive Mr. Green. First recorded in 
1546, the proverb occurs in Shakespeare’s 
play The Taming of the Shrew (4:1): “Now 
were not I a little pot and soon hot, my 
very lips might freeze to my teeth.”
little strokes fell great oaks  Great 
things can be achieved in small stages, or 
with persistent effort: “Stick to it steadily 
and you will see great Effects; for . . . 
little Strokes fell great Oaks” (Benjamin 
Franklin, Poor Richard Improved, 1757). 
The proverb is probably of ancient origin; 
in his Adagia (1500) the Dutch human-
ist Desiderius Erasmus quotes the Latin 
proverb “Multis ictibus deiicitur quercus 
[The oak is felled by many blows].” It also 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play Henry VI, Part 
3 (2:1): “And many strokes, though with 
a little axe,/Hews down and fells the 
hardest-timber’d oak.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: constant dropping wears away a 
stone.
little thieves are hanged, but great ones 
escape  It is often the case that petty 
criminals are brought to justice, while 
those involved in more serious crimes 
succeed in evading capture and punish-
ment: The man who masterminded the rob-
bery is living a life of luxury in exile, while 
his accomplices rot in jail. As always, the 
little thieves are hanged but the great ones 
escape. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1639, but the French had 
 little thieves are hanged, but great ones escape
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   173 1/29/07   5:12:46 PM
174
a similar saying in the late 14th century: 
“Les petits larrons sont penduez, non pas les 
grands [Little thieves are hanged, not 
big ones].”
little things please little minds  Foolish 
people are easily pleased; said contemptu-
ously to or of somebody who is amused 
by something childish or trivial: She was 
engrossed in folding the discarded candy wrap-
pers into different shapes—little things please 
little minds! The proverb has been traced 
back to the works of the Roman poet 
Ovid (43 b.c.–a.d. 18): “parva leves capiunt 
animos [small things enthral light minds].” 
It was fi rst recorded in English in 1576 in 
the form “A little thing pleases a fool.” A 
person to whom the proverb is contemp-
tuously addressed may retort, “While 
smaller minds look on” or “While bigger 
fools look on.”
Variant of this proverb: small things 
affect light minds.
live and learn  People learn by experi-
ence; often said by or to somebody who 
has made an error of judgment: I thought 
they could be trusted, but it seems I was 
wrong—live and learn. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1575 (in George Gas-
coigne, The Glasse of Governement) as “We 
live to learne.”
Variant of this proverb: live and 
learn; die and forget.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: experience is the mother of wis-
dom; the older the wiser.
live and let live  We must be tolerant of 
other people, and not condemn or try to 
change their way of life just because it is 
different from our own: “If ‘pragmatism’ 
and ‘pluralism’ meant a new openness 
and tolerance, a willingness, in common 
parlance, ‘to live and let live,’ an erosion 
of dogmatism, and a decline in religious 
and racial prejudices, they also meant an 
often bewildering absence of certitude, 
a sense of confusion and even abandon-
ment” (Page Smith, The Rise of Industrial 
America, 1984). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1622, and is said to be of 
Dutch origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it takes all kinds of people to make 
a world.
live by the sword, die by the sword  See 
he who lives by the sword dies by the 
sword.
a live dog is better than a dead lion  It 
is better to be alive than dead; used to 
justify an apparent act of cowardice in a 
life-threatening situation: “When the lion 
is shot, the dog gets the spoil. So he had 
come in for Katherine, Alan’s lioness. A 
live dog is better than a dead lion” (D. 
H. Lawrence, The Woman Who Rode Away, 
1928). The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“To him that is joined to all the living 
there is hope: for a living dog is better 
than a dead lion” (Ecclesiastes 9:4).
Variant of this proverb: a living dog 
is better than a dead lion.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he who fights and runs away may live 
to fight another day.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: it’s better to die on your feet 
than live on your knees.
live every day as though it were your 
last  Live life to the full, and make 
the most of every waking moment: “He 
enjoyed variety. He loved adventure. ‘Live 
little things please little minds
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   174 1/29/07   5:12:46 PM
175
each day as if it’s your last’—that became 
his philosophy” (C. David Heymann, A 
Woman Named Jackie, 1989).
Variant of this proverb: live each day 
as though it were the last.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomor-
row we die.
a living dog is better than a dead 
lion  See a live dog is better than a 
dead lion.
location, location, location  It is the 
physical location that gives something its 
real value: In the end they decided not to move 
the company into the center of town, forgetting 
the golden rule “location, location, location.” An 
introduction of the late 20th century, it has 
become partiularly associated with the sell-
ing of property.
the longest day must have an end  No 
bad experience lasts forever: He hid in the 
shelter while the bombardment continued, tell-
ing himself over and over again that the longest 
day must have an end. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1580 in John Lyly’s Euphues 
and His England.
Variant of this proverb: the longest 
night will have an end.
Proverbs expressing a similar 
meaning: be the day weary or be the 
day long, at last it ringeth to even-
song; it’s a long road that has no 
turning.
the longest journey begins with a single 
step  See a journey of a thousand 
miles begins with one step.
the longest night will have an end  See 
the longest day must have an end.
the longest way around is the shortest 
way home  It is best to do things care-
fully and thoroughly rather than trying 
to cut corners: There is a quicker method of 
doing the calculation, but people often make 
mistakes when they use it—in this case the 
longest way around is the shortest way home. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1635 
in the form “The next way home’s the 
farthest way about.” The sentiment it 
expresses, however, is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: the farthest 
way about is the nearest way home.
long foretold, long last; short notice, 
soon past  A change in the weather that 
is predicted well in advance lasts longer 
than one that arrives with little warning: 
If the saying “Long foretold, long last; short 
notice, soon past,” an old piece of weather lore, 
can be applied to the economy, then this unex-
pected downturn should be of relatively brief 
duration. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1866 (A. Steinmetz, Manual of Weather-
casts), but with the implication that it had 
long been in use among amateur weather 
forecasters.
look after the pennies and the dollars 
will look after themselves  See take 
care of the pennies and the dollars 
will take care of themselves.
look before you leap  Think before you 
act, especially before you do something 
that could have serious or disastrous con-
sequences: “When you feel tempted to 
marry . . . look twice before you leap” 
(Charlotte Brontë, Shirley, 1849). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1350 in the 
form “First look and afterward leap,” but 
the sentiment it expresses can be found in 
the fables of Aesop (sixth century b.c.).
 look before you leap
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   175 1/29/07   5:12:46 PM
176
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
action without thought is like shoot-
ing without aim.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: he who hesitates is lost.
lookers-on see most of the game  An 
objective observer with an overall view of 
a situation is often more knowledgeable, 
or better placed to make a judgment, than 
somebody who is actively involved, and 
whose attention is therefore focused on 
individual details: Lookers-on see most of the 
game, and the solution was obvious to all except 
those who were trying to fi nd it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in Francis Bacon’s essay 
“Of Followers” (1597): “To take aduise of 
friends is euer honorable: For lookers on 
many times see more then gamesters.” 
The sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: lookers-on 
see more than players.
look on the bright side, or polish up the 
dark one  See always look on the 
bright side. 
look out for number one  See take care 
of number one.
loose lips sink ships  Careless talk can 
cause trouble, if it results in the wrong 
people gaining access to sensitive infor-
mation: “Mr. Hopkins, who said he was 
‘appalled’ when Mr. Aspin left the hearing 
Tuesday and talked at length with report-
ers waiting outside, was particularly harsh 
in his criticism today. ‘It makes us bring 
back the old saying, perhaps—loose lips 
sink ships,’ Mr. Hopkins said” (New York 
Times, 1987). The proverb originated as a 
security slogan of World War II.
Variant of this proverb: a slip of the 
lip will sink a ship.
the Lord gives and the Lord takes away 
God has the right to take away something 
that he has previously given to us: often 
said in consolation to, or resignedly by, 
somebody who has suffered a devastating 
loss: We would all like to hold onto the beauty 
and stamina of our youth, but we must remem-
ber that the Lord gives and the Lord takes away. 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Naked 
came I out of my mother’s womb, and 
naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, 
and the Lord hath taken away” (Job 1:21).
Variant of this proverb: the Lord 
who gave can take away.
the Lord moves in mysterious ways  See 
god moves in mysterious ways.
lordships change manners  See honors 
change manners.
the Lord who gave can take away  See 
the lord gives and the lord takes away.
lose an hour in the morning, chase it all 
day  Time lost in the morning is impos-
sible to make up later in the day: His secre-
tary was always punctual, knowing that is she 
lost an hour in the morning she would chase it 
all day. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1859 in Samuel Smiles’s Self-Help.
Variant of this proverb: lost time is 
never found again.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
an hour in the morning is worth 
two in the evening; time lost cannot 
be recalled.
love and a cough cannot be hid  It is 
impossible to conceal the fact that you 
lookers-on see most of the game
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   176 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
177
are in love with somebody: It is said that 
love and a cough cannot be hid, but they 
managed to keep their relationship secret for 
several months. Of Latin origin, the proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English in 1573 in 
J. Sandforde’s Garden of Pleasure (1573): 
“Foure things cannot be kept close, Loue, 
the cough, fyre, and sorrowe.”
Variant of this proverb: love and 
smoke cannot be hidden.
love begets love  The best way to win 
somebody’s affection is to treat him or 
her in a loving manner: “Love begets 
love, and . . . if a man loves God, then 
that glowing beam will glow whether it 
is turned to earth or turned to heaven” 
(Alexander MacLaren, The Epistle to the 
Ephesians, 1909). Of Latin origin, the 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
Robert Herrick’s Hesperides (1648): “Love 
love begets, then never be/Unsoft to him 
who’s smooth to thee.”
love conquers all  Love can overcome 
any obstacle or opposition: Their relation-
ship survived and fl ourished, despite parental 
disapproval and long periods of separation, 
proving that love does indeed conquer all. 
The proverb comes from the writings of 
Virgil (70–19 b.c.): “Omnia vincit Amor 
[Love conquers all things].” The alterna-
tive Latin form “Amor vincit omnia” occurs 
in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
love will find a way.
love is blind  People do not notice the 
faults of those they love: “Love is blind. 
It’s also deaf and sometimes stupid” (Wash-
ington Times, 1998). Of ancient origin, the 
proverb occurs in the writings of the Greek 
poet Theocritus (c. 308–c. 240 b.c.). It 
was fi rst recorded in English in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390).
love is blind; friendship closes its eyes 
Lovers do not notice each other’s faults, 
whereas friends notice but disregard them: 
Love is blind; friendship closes its eyes—I know 
Jack’s a rogue, but I still value him as a friend, 
whereas Molly is too infatuated with him to 
believe that he’s anything but a saint.
love is free  People tend to fall in love 
regardless of the suitability of the match 
or other obstacles. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1386 in Geoffrey Chaucer’s 
The Knight’s Tale: “Thynk wel that love is 
fre! And I wol love hire mawgree al thy 
myght.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
love will find a way.
love laughs at locksmiths  Nothing and 
nobody can keep lovers apart: There’s no 
point in trying to stop her seeing her boy-
friend by making her a prisoner in her own 
home—love laughs at locksmiths. The prov-
erb dates from 1803, when it was used as 
the title of a play by George Colman. The 
sentiment it expresses, however, occurs 
in Shakespeare’s poem “Venus and Adonis” 
(1592–93): “Were beauty under twenty 
locks kept fast,/Yet love breaks through 
and picks them all at last.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
love will find a way.
love makes the world go round  Love 
gives motivation and meaning to all 
human activity: “‘Oh, ’tis love, ’tis love 
that makes the world go round!’ ‘Some-
body said,’ Alice whispered, ‘that it’s done 
by everybody minding their own busi-
ness’” (Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in 
 love makes the world go round
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   177 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
178
Wonderland, 1865). The proverb occurs in 
a French popular song of unknown date 
and authorship, and a similar observation 
regarding heaven was made by the Italian 
poets Jacopone da Todi (c. 1230–1306) 
and Dante Alighieri (1265–1321). In his 
novel Whisky Galore (1947), Compton 
Mackenzie wrote, “Love makes the world 
go round? Not at all. Whisky makes it go 
round twice as fast.”
love me, love my dog  If you love some-
body, you must be prepared to accept 
or tolerate everything and everybody 
connected with that person—his or her 
failings, idiosyncrasies, friends, rela-
tives, and so on: “‘I hope, Glencora, you 
do not count me as your enemy?’ said 
Mrs. Marsham, drawing herself up. ‘But 
I shall—certainly, if you attack Alice. 
Love me, love my dog. I beg your pardon, 
Alice; but what I meant was this, Mrs. 
Marsham; Love me, love the best friend I 
have in the world’” (Anthony Trollope, Can 
You Forgive Her?, 1864). The proverb dates 
from the 12th century or earlier, and was 
used in a sermon by Saint Bernard: “qui 
me amat, amat et canem meum [who loves 
me, also loves my dog].”
love me little, love me long  Warm affec-
tion lasts longer than burning passion: 
Their relationship was far too intense to 
last—there is truth in the old saying “Love me 
little, love me long.” The proverb dates from 
before 1500. The sentiment it expresses 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play Romeo and 
Juliet (2:6), “Therefore love moderately; 
long love doth so.”
the love of money is the root of all 
evil  Greed and avarice are the cause of 
many of the ills of this world: There are 
those who condemn capitalism on the basis of 
the proverb “The love of money is the root of all 
evil.” The proverb is of biblical origin: “For 
the love of money is the root of all evil: 
which while some coveted after, they have 
erred from the faith” (1 Timothy 6:10).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money is the root of all evil.
love will fi nd a way  There are no effec-
tive obstacles to or defenses against love: 
The behavior of diffi cult children can improve 
dramatically after a few months in a car-
ing foster family—love will fi nd a way. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in Thomas 
Deloney’s The Gentle Craft (c. 1598).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: love conquers all; love is free; 
love laughs at locksmiths.
love your enemy, but don’t put a gun 
in his hand  Treat your enemies with 
respect and humanity, but also with cau-
tion— do not give them the opportunity 
to repay your kindness with an act of 
aggression: Several people spoke against the 
proposal, warning that it could prove to be a 
step too far in the détente between East and 
West. One of them reminded the assembly of the 
proverb “Love your enemy, but don’t put a gun 
in his hand.”
love your neighbor as yourself  Every-
body should treat everybody else with 
respect, kindness, and tolerance: The 
world would be a better place if only people 
could be persuaded to follow this simple rule: 
“Love your neighbor as yourself.” The prov-
erb is of biblical origin: “Thou shalt not 
avenge, nor bear any grudge against the 
children of thy people, but thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself ” (Leviticus 19:18). 
Extensions of the proverb include “Love 
love me, love my dog
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   178 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
179
your neighbor, but don’t pull down the 
fence” and “Love your neighbor, but leave 
his wife alone.”
lucky at cards, unlucky in love  Those 
who have luck at card games are less for-
tunate in matters of the heart; said when 
somebody wins or loses at cards: After losing 
six games in succession, she consoled herself with 
the saying “Lucky at cards, unlucky in love.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1866, but 
with the implication that it had long been 
in general use. The sentiment it expresses 
occurs in Jonathan Swift’s Polite Conversation 
(1738): “Well, Miss, you’ll have a sad Hus-
band, you have such good Luck at Cards.”
 lucky at cards, unlucky in love