180
make a virtue of necessity  The best 
way to handle an undesirable situation is 
to turn it to your advantage: “Welcomed 
as a friend of the house, I had nothing for 
it but to take my seat quietly, and making 
a virtue of necessity, endeavour to derive 
my share of the benefi t arising from 
an excellent sermon” (Sir Walter Scott, 
Chronicles of the Canongate, 1827). Of 
ancient origin, the proverb occurs in the 
writings of Chaucer and Shakespeare.
make haste slowly  Do not rush—you 
will achieve your end more quickly if you 
proceed with care: In conducting an investi-
gation of this nature, the police were well aware 
of the need to make haste slowly—it was far 
too easy to overlook a vital clue. In its Latin 
form “Festina lente,” the proverb is attrib-
uted to the Roman emperor Augustus (63 
b.c.–a.d. 14). It was fi rst recorded in its 
current form in Benjamin Franklin’s Poor 
Richard’s Almanack (1744).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
slow and steady wins the race.
make hay while the sun shines  Take 
advantage of an opportunity or a favorable 
situation when it presents itself, because 
it may be short-lived: “Meanwhile . . . 
I was busy with my own affairs, making 
hay while the sun shone. So great were 
the crowds of people who came up to 
Nodwengu that in a week I had sold 
everything I had to sell in the two wagons, 
that were mostly laden with cloth, beads, 
knives and so forth” (H. Rider Haggard, 
Child of Storm, 1913). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in John Heywood’s Dialogue 
of Proverbs (1546).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: hoist your sail when the wind is 
fair; strike while the iron is hot.
a man can only die once  Death can 
only happen once in a lifetime: The con-
demned man was sanguine about the coming 
ordeal, telling himself “a man can only die 
once.” The proverb was first recorded 
c. 1597 by William Shakespeare in 2 
Henry IV (3:2), in the form “A man can 
die but once.”
man does not live by bread alone  Peo-
ple need more than the basic necessities, 
such as food and shelter, to lead a full 
and satisfying life: “Man, we know, can-
not live by bread alone but hang me if I 
don’t believe that some women could live 
by love alone” (Joseph Conrad, Chance, 
1913). The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“man doth not live by bread only, but by 
every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 8:3), 
m
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   180 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
181
“It is written, Man shall not live by bread 
alone, but by every word that proceedeth 
out of the mouth of God” (Matthew 4:4).
Variant of this proverb: man cannot 
live by bread alone.
a man in debt is caught in a net  Those 
who owe money are trapped by their obli-
gations and at the mercy of their creditors: 
My father once told me, “A man in debt is caught 
in a net,” and on the basis of that advice I have 
never borrowed a cent from anybody.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
out of debt, out of danger.
a man is a lion in his own cause  People 
tend to exceed expectations when they 
have a personal interest in something: No 
one thought he would put up much of a struggle 
in court, but men can prove lions in their own 
cause. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
David Fergusson, Scottish Proverbs, 1641.
a man is as old as he feels, and a woman 
as old as she looks  Chronological age 
is irrelevant—a man of 40 may feel 30 
on a good day and 50 on a bad day, and a 
woman can use clothing and cosmetics to 
make herself look younger or older than 
she is: “She is always making me out so 
much older than I am and that’s not fair, 
for a man is only as old as he feels and a 
woman is only as old as she looks” (V. Lush, 
Thames Journal, 1871). The quotation is 
the fi rst recorded use of the proverb. Its 
two halves are often used separately, the 
fi rst to encourage a youthful attitude to 
life, and the second to encourage women 
to take care of their appearance. Facetious 
variants include “A man is as old as the 
woman he feels” and “A man is as old as 
he feels, a woman as old as she feels like 
admitting.”
a man is innocent until proven guilty  A 
person accused of a crime or wrongdoing 
is assumed to be innocent until his or her 
guilt has been proved; a legal principle 
in many countries: “‘Do you feel your 
“no comment” will be translated as say-
ing you’re guilty?’ ‘To my knowledge,’ he 
said, ‘you’re innocent until proven guilty’” 
(New York Times, 1989). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1910, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of earlier origin, e.g., 
Junius, Letters: “Where the guilt is doubt-
ful, a presumption of innocence should in 
general be admitted.”
a man is known by the company he 
keeps  People may base their judgment 
of you on the reputation or character of 
those you associate with, so take care in 
choosing your friends: “Now when you 
came here, I told you to make friends 
slowly, I told you to make sure they were 
the right kinds of friends. You’re known by 
the company you keep” (Robert Anderson, 
Tea and Sympathy, 1953). First recorded in 
1541 with different wording, the proverb 
appeared in 1591 in a book offering advice 
to those preparing for marriage: “If a man 
can be known by nothing else, then he may 
be known by his companions.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
birds of a feather flock together.
man is the measure of all things  Hu-
man beings are capable of rising to any 
challenge: “As of all things man is said the 
measure,/So your full merits measure 
forth a man” (George Chapman, Caesar 
and Pompey, 1631). Similar sentiments 
were voiced by Plato, but the earliest 
record of the proverb in English dates to 
1547, when it appeared in W. Baldwin’s 
Morall Phylosophie.
 man is the measure of all things
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   181 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
182
manners make the man  Good manners 
are of the utmost importance: Remember 
that manners make the man—you will be judged 
on how you behave, not on what you look like, 
where you come from, or who your parents are. 
First recorded c. 1350, the proverb was the 
motto of the bishop of Winchester, Eng-
land, William of Wykeham (1324–1404).
Variant of this proverb: manners 
maketh man.
man proposes, God disposes  Human 
plans and ambitions will come to noth-
ing unless God chooses to permit their 
realization: “‘he will allow you an income 
of 50,000 livres per annum during the 
whole time of your stay in Paris.’ ‘Then in 
that case I shall always choose to remain 
there.’ ‘You cannot control circumstances, 
my dear sir; “man proposes, and God dis-
poses”’ ” (Alexandre Dumas, The Count of 
Monte Cristo, 1844–45). First recorded in 
French in the early 14th century, the prov-
erb occurs in its Latin form, “homo propo-
nit, sed Deus disponit,” in Thomas à Kempis’s 
De Imitatione Christi (c. 1420), which was 
translated into English c. 1450.
man’s best friend is his dog  See a dog 
is a man’s best friend.
a man’s best reputation for the future 
is his record of the past  A person’s 
record of past achievement or conduct 
may be used to predict his or her future 
performance: A man’s best reputation for the 
future is his record of the past, so with a résumé 
like this you should have no diffi culty fi nding 
another job. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
man’s extremity is God’s opportunity 
People often turn to religion in times 
of crisis, and such times give God the 
opportunity to demonstrate his power: 
“In the fi rst winter of the war . . . we were 
all much encouraged by tales of a new 
thirst for religion among the majority 
of the men. . . . ‘Man’s extremity, God’s 
opportunity’” (E. A. Burroughs, The Valley 
of Decision, 1916). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1629.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the danger past and god forgotten.
a man’s got to do what a man’s got 
to do  You must do what needs to be 
done, or what you feel ought to be done, 
however unpleasant it may be; sometimes 
used facetiously: It won’t be easy, breaking 
the news to them, but a man’s got to do what 
a man’s got to do. The proverb is associated 
with the U.S. actor John Wayne, who 
used it in the movie Stagecoach (1939). It 
also occurs in John Steinbeck’s novel The 
Grapes of Wrath (1939): “I know this—a 
man got to do what he got to do.”
a man’s home is his castle  People have 
the right to privacy and freedom of action 
in their own home: “A man’s home is his 
castle—he can defend it with bazookas 
and machine guns if he knows where to 
get them” (Clifford Irving, The Campbell 
Murder Case, 1988). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1581 and enshrines a legal 
maxim stated by the English jurist Sir 
Edward Coke (1552–1634): “For a man’s 
house is his castle, et domus sua cuique tutis-
simum refugium [and each man’s home is 
his safest refuge].” It is sometimes adapted 
to different situations by substituting 
another word for home, as in “A man’s 
automobile is his castle.”
Variant of this proverb: an English-
man’s home is his castle.
manners make the man
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   182 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
183
a man’s word is as good as his 
bond  Honorable people do not break 
their promises: I said I would repay the money 
before the end of the month, and I will do so—a 
man’s word is as good as his bond. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1500 in the form “A 
king’s word should be a king’s bond.”
Variants of this proverb: an hon-
est man’s word is as good as his bond; a 
gentleman’s word is his bond.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: promises, like piecrust, are made 
to be broken.
man’s work lasts till set of sun; woman’s 
work is never done  See a woman’s 
work is never done.
the man who is born in a stable is not a 
horse  A person does not necessarily have 
the stereotypical characteristics of the place 
where he or she was born: Teased at college 
about his Oklahoma origins, he used to reply, “The 
man who is born in a stable is not a horse.” The 
proverb is attributed to Arthur Wellesley, 
Duke of Wellington (1769–1852).
Variant of this proverb: because a 
man is born in a stable that does not make 
him a horse.
a man who is his own lawyer has a fool 
for his client  It is not wise to act as your 
own attorney in a court of law, or in some 
other legal process; also used in other fi elds 
of activity requiring professional expertise 
or objectivity: She decided to represent herself, 
despite our warnings that a man who is his own 
lawyer has a fool for his client, with disastrous 
consequences. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1809 in Philadelphia (Port Folio).
a man without a religion is a horse with-
out a bridle  Religion helps to guide a 
person through life, and control his or her 
behavior, just as a bridle is used to guide 
and control a horse: My grandmother was 
fairly tolerant in matters of religion, believing 
that everybody should be allowed to worship their 
own god, but she had no time for atheists. “A man 
without a religion is a horse without a bridle,” she 
used to say. The proverb is fi rst recorded in 
Robert Burton’s The Anatomy of Melancholy 
(1621). The proverb is of Latin origin: Homo 
sine religione, sicut equus sine freno.
a man wrapped up in himself makes a 
very small bundle  Self-centeredness is 
not a quality that is associated with great-
ness: Rather than wallowing in self-pity after 
the death of his wife, he threw himself into 
voluntary work for a number of good causes, 
on the basis that a man wrapped up in himself 
makes a very small bundle.
many a little makes a mickle  Small 
amounts accumulate to form a large quan-
tity; often used of small sums of money 
saved over a long period: “My mother 
used, upon all occasions, to inculcate some 
salutary axioms . . . and as I grew up, 
stored my memory with deeper observa-
tions; restrained me from the usual puer-
ile expenses, by remarking that MANY 
A LITTLE MADE A MICKLE” (Samuel 
Johnson, Essays, c. 1750). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1614, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin. 
Mickle is a dialect word for a large quantity. 
The variant form “Many a mickle makes a 
muckle” is actually meaningless, as muckle 
is synonymous with mickle.
Variant of this proverb: many a 
mickle makes a muckle.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every little helps; little and 
often fills the purse.
 many a little makes a mickle
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   183 1/29/07   5:12:48 PM
184
many are called, but few are chosen 
Not everybody who wants to do something 
is selected or permitted to do it; used in any 
elitist situation: Although some of the lesser-
known colleges and universities are desperate for 
students, in the case of Harvard and similarly 
prestigious institutions, many are called but few 
are chosen. The proverb is of biblical origin, 
occurring in this form in Matthew 22:14.
many a true word is spoken in jest 
Something said jokingly often proves to 
be true: Many a true word is spoken in jest, 
and the seeds of suspicion were sown in my 
mind when somebody fl ippantly remarked, 
regarding my wife’s strange behavior, “Perhaps 
she’s having an affair.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1665, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin, occurring in Chaucer’s Canterbury 
Tales (c.1390): “Be nat wrooth, my lord, 
though that I pleye./Ful ofte in game a 
sooth [truth] I have herd seye!”
Variant of this proverb: there’s many 
a true word said in jest.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
jesters do oft prove prophets.
many drops of water make an ocean  See 
little drops of water, little grains 
of sand, make a mighty ocean and a 
pleasant land.
many go out for wool and come home 
shorn  Many people who set out to 
make their fortune, or to achieve some 
other aim, end up in a worse state than 
before: “Some go intent on repairing the 
ravages of Epsom or Newmarket [English 
horse-racing events]; and in this specula-
tive section not a few . . . who go for 
wool come away shorn” (G. W. E. Russell, 
Sketches and Snapshots, 1910). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1599 in John 
Minsheu’s Spanish Dialogues.
many hands make light work  Work 
is quickly and easily done when many 
people help: Come on, many hands make 
light work, and if we all do our bit the house 
will be spotless again by the time my parents get 
back. Of ancient origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English c. 1330.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: too many cooks spoil the broth.
many kiss the hand they wish to see cut 
off  A person’s true feelings or intentions 
may be concealed by the mask of politeness 
or hypocrisy; used to warn against being 
deceived by such a show: Some were surprised 
to see him at the ceremony, knowing his intense 
dislike of everything the organization stands for, 
but many kiss the hand they wish to see cut off. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1599 in 
John Minsheu’s Spanish Dialogues.
March comes in like a lion and goes out 
like a lamb  The month of March often 
begins with wild, stormy weather and 
ends with mild, fair weather: Those who are 
still repairing the damage caused by the storms 
that struck the region earlier this month are 
hoping that the saying about March coming in 
like a lion and going out like a lamb will prove 
true. The proverb dates from before 1625 
(John Fletcher, A Wife for a Month).
Variant of this proverb: March is in 
like a lion, out like a lamb.
March winds and April showers always 
bring May fl owers  See april showers 
bring may flowers.
marriage is a lottery  Whether a mar-
riage succeeds or fails is all a matter of 
many are called, but few are chosen
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   184 1/29/07   5:12:48 PM
185
luck; also applied to the choice of a mar-
riage partner: If it’s true that marriage is a 
lottery, then my grandparents must be one of 
the couples that hit the jackpot. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1642 (Thomas 
Fuller’s Holy State).
marriages are made in heaven  Pro-
vidence decides who will marry whom: 
“I have always liked the sound of the 
phrase ‘a marriage has been arranged’
. . . . I prefer the idea of arrangement 
to that other statement, that marriages 
are made in Heaven” (Stella Gibbons, 
Cold Comfort Farm, 1932). The proverb 
was first recorded in 1567, in William 
Painter’s Palace of Pleasure: “True it is, 
that marriages be don in Heaven and 
performed in earth.” It has given rise 
to the figurative phrase a marriage made 
in heaven, describing an ideal marriage 
or any merger or combination of two 
parties or elements that are in perfect 
harmony.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
hanging and wiving go by destiny.
marry in haste, repent at leisure  Those 
who rush into marriage, and subsequently 
discover that they have made a mistake, 
may have to live with the unpleasant 
consequences for a long time: “‘Marry 
in haste and repent at leisure’ is a prov-
erb that may be borne in mind with 
advantage in the choice of a party as well 
as of a wife” (Sir William Stirling-Max-
well, Works, 1872). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1568. It is sometimes applied 
to other acts of rashness, with a different 
verb in place of marry.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: happy’s the wooing that’s not 
long a-doing.
marry in May, rue for aye  According 
to popular superstition, it is unlucky to 
marry in May: My mother was horrifi ed to 
hear that we had chosen May 15 for our wed-
ding day. “Marry in May, rue for aye!” she cried. 
I wonder what she would have said if she had 
lived to join us at our 50th anniversary cel-
ebrations last weekend. The proverb occurs 
in the writings of the Roman poet Ovid 
(43 b.c.–a.d. 18): “mense malum Maio 
nubere volgus ait [the common people say 
it is bad luck to marry in May].”
May chickens come cheeping  Children 
born in the month of May are weak and 
delicate: Born on May 20, 1902, he never 
had a day’s illness in his life and died at the 
grand old age of 98. So much for the proverb 
“May chickens come cheeping”! The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1868 in A. Hislop’s 
The Proverbs of Scotland.
meat and mass never hindered man  You 
can always fi nd time to eat and to go to 
church; said to somebody who claims to 
be too busy, or in too much of a hurry, 
for one or both of these: “Meat and mass 
never hindered man. The mass I cannot 
afford you, for we are all good Protes-
tants. But the meat I press on your atten-
tion” (Robert Louis Stevenson, Catriona, 
1893). The proverb dates from before 
1628.
medicine can prolong life, but death 
will seize the doctor, too  The power of 
medicine is limited, and everybody must 
die eventually: Those who expect miracles of 
the medical profession would do well to remem-
ber the saying “Medicine can prolong life, but 
death will seize the doctor too.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
death defies the doctor.
 medicine can prolong life, but death will seize the doctor, too
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   185 1/29/07   5:12:48 PM
186
the meek shall inherit the earth  Hu-
mility will ultimately be rewarded: “We 
have the highest authority for believing 
that the meek shall inherit the Earth; 
though I have never found any particular 
corroboration of this aphorism in the 
records of Somerset House [British reg-
istry of births, marriages, and deaths]” 
(F. E. Smith, Earl of Birkenhead, Contem-
porary Personalities, 1924). The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “Blessed are the meek: 
for they shall inherit the earth” (Matthew 
5:5). The facetious variant “The meek 
shall inherit the earth, but not its mineral 
rights” is attributed to the U.S. oil execu-
tive J. Paul Getty (1892–1976). Equally 
fl ippant is the modern variant “The geek 
shall inherit the earth.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
soft and fair goes far; softly, softly, 
catchee monkey.
men are blind in their own cause  Peo-
ple cannot be objective or think rationally 
in matters they feel very strongly about: 
It’s useless trying to reason with him—men are 
blind in their own cause. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in John Heywood’s 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: nobody should be judge in his own 
cause.
men are from Mars, women are from 
Venus  Men and women have essentially 
dissimilar natures: My mother and father 
never agreed about anything, but then, men 
are from Mars and women are from Venus. It 
achieved proverbial status after appearing 
as the title of the 1993 book Men Are from 
Mars, Women Are from Venus: A Practical Guide 
for Improving Communication and Getting 
What You Want in Your Relationships by John 
Gray. A jocular variant runs: “Men are 
from earth, women are from earth. Deal 
with it.”
men make houses, women make 
homes  Although men can build or buy 
property, it takes a woman to turn a 
house into a home: His apartment is very 
tastefully furnished, but it’s a bit austere 
and unwelcoming—as they say, “Men make 
houses, women make homes.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1938 in Selwyn Gur-
ney Champion’s Racial Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: men build 
houses, women build homes.
a merry heart makes a cheerful counte-
nance  Inward feelings of happiness are 
refl ected on the face: I’m supposed to greet 
the customers with a happy face, but what do 
I have to smile about? If a merry heart makes 
a cheerful countenance, it’s small wonder that 
I’m accused of looking miserable most of the 
time. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“A merry heart maketh a cheerful coun-
tenance: but by sorrow of the heart the 
spirit is broken” (Proverbs 15:13).
Variant of this proverb: the joy of the 
heart makes the face fair.
might makes right  In any dispute or 
contest, the more powerful party will 
prevail, regardless of justice: Might makes 
right, and litigation is a costly and futile exer-
cise when the defendant is one of the largest 
multinational companies in the world. First 
recorded in English in the early 14th 
century, the proverb is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the epic Pharsalia by the 
Roman poet Lucan (a.d. 39–65) “men-
suraque iuris vis erat [might was the mea-
sure of right].” The sentiment it expresses 
occurs even earlier, in Plato’s Republic 
the meek shall inherit the earth
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   186 1/29/07   5:12:48 PM
187
(fourth century b.c.): “justice is nothing 
else than the interest of the stronger.”
Variants of this proverb: might is 
right; might beats right.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
providence is always on the side of 
the big battalions.
the mill cannot grind with the water that 
is past  There is no point in looking back 
with regret on missed opportunities; used 
either to encourage people to take full 
advantage of the present or simply to dis-
courage them from yearning for the past: 
“It did no good to think back. The mill 
cannot grind with the water that is past, 
as the old people in the mountains used 
to say” (Guy Richards, Red Kill, 1980). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in Thomas 
Draxe’s Adages (1616).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: seize the day; take time by the 
forelock.
the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceedingly small  Retribution 
may be a long time in coming, but it 
cannot be avoided; also loosely applied 
to any slow or painstaking process: You 
may think you’ve got off scot-free, but just you 
wait—the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceedingly small. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1640 in the 
form “God’s mill grinds slow, but sure.” It 
originated in a line quoted by the Greek 
philosopher Sextus Empiricus (second 
century a.d.), which was subsequently 
used by the German poet Friedrich Von 
Logau (1604–55) in a poem ultimately 
translated into English by Henry Wad-
sworth Longfellow (1807–82): “Though 
the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceeding small;/Though with 
patience He stands waiting, with exact-
ness grinds He all.”
Variant of this proverb: the mills of 
God grind slowly, but they grind exceed-
ingly fi ne.
a mind is a terrible thing to waste  Ev-
erybody should make best use of the 
intellectual capacity they have: “We will 
launch a renaissance in education, in sci-
ence and learning. A mind is a terrible 
thing to waste” (Walter Mondale, New York 
Times, 1984). The proverb has been the 
slogan of the United Negro College Fund 
since 1972.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
mind unemployed is mind unenjoyed.
mind unemployed is mind unenjoyed  By 
failing to put your mind to use you fail to 
take advantage of the resources and plea-
sures it offers you: At his retirement party 
he announced that he had enrolled for a corre-
spondence course in sociology, on the basis of the 
proverb “Mind unemployed is mind unenjoyed.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a mind is a terrible thing to waste.
mind your own business  Concentrate 
upon your own affairs (rather than those 
of others): “The Devil has got a lot of 
maxims which his adherents . . . are not 
slow to use —‘Mind your own business’” 
(R. J. Mackenzie, Life, 1905). The proverb 
(now used more often as a rebuke to those 
who interfere in the business of others) 
was fi rst recorded in 1639 in J. Clarke’s 
Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina.
misery loves company  When you are 
unhappy, it is good to be with others who 
have suffered in a similar way, or simply 
with people who will listen to your woes 
 misery loves company
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   187 1/29/07   5:12:48 PM
188
and offer sympathy; also used to imply 
that miserable or unfortunate people like 
everybody around them to be in the same 
situation: Group therapy can be very effective 
in cases like these—misery loves company. The 
proverb dates from before 1349.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a trouble shared is a trouble halved.
misery makes strange bedfellows  See 
adversity makes strange bedfellows.
misfortunes never come singly  It is 
often the case that several misfortunes 
happen together, or in quick succession: 
“‘We are now without father: we shall 
soon be without home and brother,’ she 
murmured. At that moment a little acci-
dent supervened, which seemed decreed 
by fate purposely to prove the truth of 
the adage, that ‘misfortunes never come 
singly.’ . . . St. John passed the win-
dow reading a letter. He entered. ‘Our 
uncle John is dead,’ said he” (Charlotte 
Brontë, Jane Eyre, 1847). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, c. 1300. The sentiment it expresses 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play Hamlet (4:5), 
“When sorrows come, they come not 
single spies,/But in battalions.” The cur-
rent form of the proverb dates from the 
17th or 18th century.
Variants of this proverb: misfortunes 
seldom come alone; troubles never come 
singly.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it never rains but it pours.
a miss is as good as a mile  If you fail, 
the margin of failure is irrelevant: “He 
was very near being a poet—but a miss is 
as good as a mile, and he always fell short 
of the mark” (Sir Walter Scott, Journal, 
1825). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1614 in the form “An inch in a miss is as 
good as an ell.”
moderation in all things  Excess is to 
be avoided wherever possible: Too much 
strenuous exercise can be as bad for you as too 
little—moderation in all things. The prov-
erb comes from the Greek poet Hesiod’s 
Works and Days (eighth century b.c.) “mod-
eration is best in all things.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: enough is as good as a feast; 
enough is enough; there’s measure in 
all things.
Monday’s child is fair of face  Children 
born on a Monday are supposed to be 
good-looking: I was born on a Monday, but 
I sometimes fi nd it hard to believe the saying 
“Monday’s child is fair of face” when I look 
in the mirror! The proverb is the fi rst line 
of a traditional rhyme. See entries at the 
days of the week for other proverbs from 
this rhyme.
money begets money  It is easy to make 
more money when you already have some: 
“‘Wish I knew something about business.’ 
‘I can tell you all I know in one sentence. 
Money gets money’” (John Steinbeck, 
The Winter of Our Discontent, 1961). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in T. Wilson’s 
Discourse upon Usury (1572).
Variants of this proverb: money gets 
money; money makes money; money 
loves company.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it takes money to make money.
money burns a hole in the pocket  Peo-
ple are often too eager to spend their 
money: Money burns a hole in the pocket—
misery makes strange bedfellows
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   188 1/29/07   5:12:49 PM
189
my grandmother used to give me some money to 
take on vacation, and my parents always had to 
restrain me from spending it all on the fi rst day. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1530 in 
the works of Sir Thomas More: “A little 
wanton money which . . . burned out the 
bottom of his purse.”
money can’t buy happiness  Money 
cannot satisfy your emotional or spiritual 
needs: Money can’t buy happiness, as a num-
ber of lottery jackpot winners have discovered. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1792. 
Other words may be substituted for hap-
piness, such as love or friends.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: a heavy purse makes a light heart; 
a light purse makes a heavy heart.
money doesn’t grow on trees  Money is 
not easily earned or acquired; often said by 
a parent to a child who is constantly asking 
for money or who spends it unwisely: No, 
I won’t give you 100 dollars to buy a ticket for 
the concert. Money doesn’t grow on trees, you 
know. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1750. With another word in place of money 
it may be used in different situations, to 
indicate a scarcity of the specifi ed thing, 
as in “Jobs don’t grow on trees” or “Good 
teachers don’t grow on trees.”
money gets money  See money begets 
money.
money has no smell  Money that comes 
from unsavory or questionable sources is 
no different from—and no less acceptable 
than—money that comes from anywhere 
else: “The associations of the wealth 
scarcely affected him. He understood 
in the fl esh the deep wisdom of that old 
proverb . . . that money has no smell” 
(Arnold Bennett, Mr. Prohack, 1922). The 
proverb comes from a story about the 
Roman emperor Vespasian, whose son 
objected to a tax on public lavatories. 
Vespasian asked him to sniff a coin thus 
obtained, and he was forced to admit that 
it did not smell offensive. The proverb is 
sometimes quoted in the Latin form “Non 
olet [It does not smell].”
money isn’t everything  Money is not 
the only thing that matters: “He said quite 
angrily that money was not everything, 
there was the satisfaction of knowing 
you’d turned out a good job” (Flora 
Thompson, Still Glides the Stream, 1948). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1842 in 
the form “Money is not all.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the best things in life are free.
money is power  Wealthy people can have 
or do what they want: “‘Money is power,’ 
Lanny said. ‘Money commands respect and 
obedience from other people’” (Upton 
Sinclair, A World to Win, 1946). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1741 (N. Ames, 
Almanacs).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a golden key can open any door; 
money talks.
money is round and rolls away  Money 
is easily spent: Money is round and rolls 
away—despite my best efforts, I never seem 
to have any left at the end of the week. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1619 in 
Helpe to Discourse.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
riches have wings.
money is the root of all evil  Money 
is the cause of many undesirable human 
 money is the root of all evil
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   189 1/29/07   5:12:49 PM
190
qualities and the motivation for many 
wicked or immoral acts: He justifi ed the 
low wages he paid to his workers by quoting the 
proverb “Money is the root of all evil.” Based 
on a misquotation of the biblical saying 
“the love of money is the root of all evil” 
(1 Timothy 6:10), the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in its current form in 1777.The 
opposite view was put forward by Samuel 
Butler, in Erewhon (1872)—“The want 
of money is the root of all evil”—and 
George Bernard Shaw, in Man and Super-
man (1903): “Lack of money is the root 
of all evil.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the love of money is the root of all 
evil.
money loves company  See money 
begets money.
money makes a man  People are 
impressed by wealth, and have respect and 
admiration for those with money: “Money 
maketh a man; even if he was a monkey to 
start with” (D. H. Lawrence, letter dated 
May 7, 1920). The proverb dates from 
before 1500.
money makes money  See money begets 
money.
money makes the mare go  Money 
enables things to be done, and things are 
done faster or more readily for those 
who are willing and able to pay well: 
Money makes the mare go, and a not-too-
subtle display of wealth can work wonders 
in cutting through red tape. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1573 in the form 
“Money makes the horse to go,” but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Variant of this proverb: money makes 
the mare to go.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money makes the world go round.
money makes the world go round 
Money funds most human affairs: Ideal-
ism is all very well, but it’s money makes the 
world go round. This relatively modern 
proverb began life as a song title from the 
Fred Ebb and John Kander musical Caba-
ret (1966), although similar sentiments 
expressing virtually the same thing date 
back much earlier.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money makes the mare go.
money talks  Wealthy people have great 
infl uence: “‘At least I assume they are mil-
lionaires?’ ‘That is what they would like 
you to assume, certainly. And if money 
talks . . . they are certainly making the 
right amount of noise’” (Anita Brookner, 
Hotel du Lac, 1984). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection, in the form “Gold speaks.” A 
facetious variant is “Money talks, but all it 
says is goodbye.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a golden key can open any door; 
money is power.
monkey see, monkey do  Foolish people 
mindlessly copy others: On the basis of the 
saying “Monkey see, monkey do,” stunts like 
these have to be accompanied by the warn-
ing “Don’t try this at home” when shown on 
prime-time television. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1934 in Robert Hare’s Hand 
of the Chimpanzee (1934).
more die of food than famine  Exces-
sive indulgence in the wrong type of food 
money loves company
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   190 1/29/07   5:12:49 PM
191
is a bigger killer than famine: Posters bear-
ing the message “More die of food than famine,” 
part of a new campaign for healthy eating, 
have been criticized by some of the charitable 
organizations involved in overseas aid.
more haste, less speed  If you do things 
hurriedly, you will make more mistakes 
and ultimately take longer; often used to 
advise somebody to act more slowly or 
carefully: “Ah, those advisers!” said he. 
“If we had listened to them all we should 
not have made peace with Turkey and 
should not have been through with that 
war. Everything in haste, but more haste, 
less speed” (Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, 
1863–69). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1350 in the form “The more haste, the 
worse speed.”
Variant of this proverb: more haste, 
worse speed.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
always in a hurry, always behind.
the more said, the less done  The more 
things are talked about, the less likely 
they are to get done: We could talk about 
this all night, but the more said, the less done. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1760 in 
George Colman’s Polly Honeycombe: “It’s 
an old saying and a true one, The more 
there’s said the less there’s done.”
the more the merrier  The more people 
who take part, the more fun everybody 
will have, so extra people are always wel-
come: “Is it OK with you if Tom and Megan 
come along too?” “Sure, the more the merrier.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1340 in 
the alliterative poem Pearl.
the more things change, the more they 
stay the same  Things never change very 
much, and something thought to be new 
and different—or peculiar to the current 
age—is often very similar to something 
that has happened before: Reading 19th-
century literature, I am often struck by the truth 
of the proverb “The more things change, the more 
they stay the same.” The proverb originated 
in French, in Alphonse Karr’s Les Guêpes 
(1849): “Plus ça change, plus c’est la même 
chose,” and the French form is sometimes 
used by English speakers, often abbreviated 
to “Plus ça change.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in George Bernard 
Shaw’s The Revolutionists’ Handbook (1903).
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
history repeats itself; there’s nothing 
new under the sun.
the more you get, the more you 
want  Getting what you want only leads 
to a desire for more: “I was averaging 
eighty to a hundred a week. Well, you 
know how it is. The more you get the more 
you want” (George Harmon Coxe, The 
Glass Triangle, 1940). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, c. 1340 
in R. Rolle’s Psalter.
Variant of this proverb: the more you 
have, the more you want.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
much would have more.
the more you stir it, the worse it 
stinks  The more you investigate an unsa-
vory or dubious affair, the more unpleas-
ant details you discover: The more you stir 
it, the worse it stinks—it now appears that a 
number of major public fi gures were involved in 
the scandal, and the cover-up was coordinated 
by the president himself. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in John Heywood, 
Dialogue of Proverbs: “The more we stur a 
tourde [turd], the wours it will stynke.”
 the more you stir it, the worse it stinks
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   191 1/29/07   5:12:49 PM
192
Variant of this proverb: the more you 
stir a stink, the louder it smells.
morning dreams come true  According 
to popular superstition, the dreams you 
have in the early hours of the morning, 
or just before waking, are the most likely 
to come true: If morning dreams really do 
come true, then I’m in for an interesting day 
at work—I dreamed this morning that my 
boss was found wandering naked in the park-
ing lot! The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in this form in 1813, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin: in the 
second century b.c. the pastoral poet 
Moschus wrote, “at the third watch of 
the night, when dawn is near, . . . and 
when the fl ock of true dreams is out 
grazing.”
most people consider thrift a fi ne vir-
tue in ancestors  People are generally 
pleased when the thrift of their ancestors 
enables them to live comfortably without 
having to be too thrifty themselves: If it 
is true that most people consider thrift a fi ne 
virtue in ancestors, then the fortune amassed 
by his family over the generations should make 
him the envy of the nation.
a mother can take care of ten children, 
but sometimes ten children can’t take 
care of one mother  No matter how 
many children she raises, a woman is 
often neglected or abandoned by all of 
them in her old age: It’s not easy, with so 
many mouths to feed, but I try to put a little 
money away each week in case I end up in a 
nursing home. Maybe I’m cynical, but I believe 
there’s a lot of truth in the saying “A mother 
can take care of ten children, but sometimes ten 
children can’t take care of one mother.” The 
proverb is of Jewish origin.
the mother of mischief is no bigger than 
a midge’s wing  A great quarrel, or 
other major trouble, is often caused by 
something trivial: The mother of mischief 
is no bigger than a midge’s wing, and a 
throwaway remark about her sister’s in-laws 
led to a family feud that lasted for more than 
20 years. The proverb dates from before 
1628.
a mouse may help a lion  Small or 
lowly people can sometimes give valu-
able assistance to those who are greater 
or more powerful than themselves: “I 
only offer to show my gratitude by doing 
what I can. . . . A mouse may help a lion” 
(John Buchan, The House of the Four Winds, 
1935). The proverb comes from one of 
the fables of Aesop (sixth century b.c.), 
in which a mouse helps a lion caught in 
a trap by chewing through the ropes that 
bind it.
the mouse that has but one hole is 
quickly taken  Do not be dependent on 
one thing alone, or on a single possible 
course of action, but have other options 
in reserve: Be sure to have an alternative plan 
to fall back on if the fi rst one fails—remember 
that the mouse that has but one hole is quickly 
taken. Of ancient origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in Chaucer’s Can-
terbury Tales (c. 1390): “I holde a mouses 
herte nat worth a leek,/That hath but oon 
hole for to sterte to.”
Variant of this proverb: the mouse 
that has but one hole is soon caught.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t put all your eggs in one 
basket.
moving three times is as bad as a fi re 
See three moves are as bad as a fire.
morning dreams come true
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   192 1/29/07   5:12:49 PM
193
much coin, much care  People with a 
lot of money have much to worry about. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
1639 in J. Clarke’s Paroemiologia Anglo-
Latina, although it also appeared as far 
back as the Odes of Horace, who rendered 
it in the form: “Care follows increasing 
wealth.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: a heavy purse makes a light heart.
much cry and little wool  Those who 
make the most noise, the loudest boasts, 
or the greatest promises often have the 
least to offer, are the least productive, or 
simply fail to deliver the goods: “‘What 
noisy fellow is that in the next room?’ 
said Joe, when he had disposed of his 
breakfast, and had washed and brushed 
himself. ‘A recruiting serjeant,’ replied 
the Lion. . . . ‘And I wish . . . he was 
anywhere else but here. The party make 
noise enough, but don’t call for much. 
There’s great cry there, Mr Willet, but 
very little wool’” (Charles Dickens, Barn-
aby Rudge, 1841). The proverb dates from 
before 1475.
Variant of this proverb: great cry but 
little wool.
much smoke, little fi re  Often when 
there is most fuss about something, there 
is least cause for it: As usual with such stories 
in the press it was a case of much smoke, little 
fi re. It was fi rst recorded in 1639 in the 
Berkeley MSS.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: there’s no smoke without fire.
much water goes by the mill that the 
miller knows not of  Many things are 
stolen or go astray without the knowledge 
of the person affected: “What, man! More 
water glideth by the mill than wots the 
miller of ” (William Shakespeare, Titus 
Andronicus, 2:1).
much would have more  People are 
never satisfi ed with what they have: We 
gave them all we could spare, but much would 
have more—they returned under cover of 
darkness and robbed us while we slept. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1350 in 
Douce MS 52.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the more you get, the more you 
want.
murder will out  The crime of murder 
rarely goes undetected, and few murder-
ers escape justice: “Crimes cause their 
own detection, do they? And murder will 
out . . ., will it?” (Wilkie Collins, The 
Woman in White, 1860). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “Mordre wol 
out; that se we day by day,” but the senti-
ment it expresses is of earlier origin, and 
it recurs in a number of Shakespeare’s 
plays.
music hath charms to soothe the savage 
breast  Music can have a calming infl u-
ence on mind and spirit, or on violent 
people: The principle that music hath charms 
to soothe the savage breast is being tested by a 
new experimental form of therapy for hyperac-
tive and disruptive youngsters, which involves 
periods of gentle exercise accompanied by 
classical music. The proverb comes from 
William Congreve’s play The Mourning 
Bride (1697): “Music has charms to soothe 
a savage breast,/To soften rocks, or bend 
a knotted oak.” The variant is a common 
misquotation. Shakespeare expressed a 
similar—but more disturbing—sentiment 
 music hath charms to soothe the savage breast
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   193 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
194
in his play Measure for Measure (4:1): “music 
oft hath such a charm/To make bad good, 
and good provoke to harm.”
Variant of this proverb: music has 
charms to soothe the savage beast.
my son is my son till he gets him a wife, 
but my daughter’s my daughter all the 
days of her life  See a son is a son till 
he gets him a wife, a daughter’s a 
daughter all of her life.
my son is my son till he gets him a wife, but my daughter’s my daughter . . .