195
nature abhors a vacuum  There are no 
defi ciencies in nature—whenever a gap or 
vacancy occurs, something or somebody 
will come along to fi ll it: “Whatever phi-
losophy may determine of material nature, 
it is certainly true of intellectual nature, 
that it abhors a vacuum: our minds cannot 
be empty” (Samuel Johnson, letter dated 
June 20, 1771). Of ancient origin, the 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1551, in Thomas Cranmer’s Answer to Gar-
diner: “Naturall reason abhorreth vacuum.”
nature does nothing in vain Nothing in 
nature happens without a purpose: The 
death of some insects immediately after laying 
their eggs may seem tragic, but nature does 
nothing in vain. A proverb that dates back 
to Aristotle, it was fi rst recorded in En-
glish c. 1580 in G. Harvey’s Marginalia.
nature passes nurture  A person’s 
inborn character, or inherited character-
istics, cannot be changed by his or her 
upbringing: They worked hard to give him the 
best education that money could buy, but nature 
passes nurture, and their efforts were wasted. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1492 in 
the form “Nature goes before learning.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: nature will have its course; what’s 
bred in the bone will come out in the 
flesh; you can drive out nature with 
a pitchfork but she keeps on coming 
back; you can take the boy out of the 
country but you can’t take the coun-
try out of the boy.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: as the twig is bent, so is the tree 
inclined; birth is much but breeding 
more; nurture passes nature.
nature will have its course  There is no 
denying natural processes or impulses: 
She tried to keep her doubts to herself but 
nature will have its course. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded c. 1400 in Beryn.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: nature passes nurture; you can 
drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back.
the nearer the bone, the sweeter the 
fl esh  Thin people are more attractive 
or desirable; also used literally of meat: I 
would describe her as skinny rather than slim, 
but the nearer the bone, the sweeter the fl esh, 
as my father used to say. The proverb dates 
from before 1398.
Variant of this proverb: the closer to 
the bone, the sweeter the meat.
the nearer the church, the farther from 
God  People who are active members 
or offi cials of a church are often the least 
godly in their daily lives; also applied to 
n
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   195 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
196
those who live close to a church: “I fear it 
was a practical comment on the truth of 
the uncomfortable proverb, ‘The nearer 
the church, the farther from God,’ that 
so bad a district should adjoin one of the 
great headquarters of the church” (Jane 
Ellice Hopkins, Work amongst Working Men, 
1879). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1303.
near is my shirt, but nearer is my skin  A 
person’s own best interests take prece-
dence over those of his or her friends and 
family: I’m not prepared to sacrifi ce my own 
chances of success for the sake of my brother—
near is my shirt, but nearer is my skin. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1570, in the 
form “Nearer is my skin than shirt,” but 
the sentiment it expresses occurs in the 
writings of the Roman dramatist Plautus 
(c. 250–184 b.c.): “tunica propior palliost 
[my tunic is closer than my cloak].”
Variants of this proverb: close sits my 
shirt, but closer my skin; near is my kirtle, 
but nearer is my smock.
necessity is the mother of invention 
When people have an urgent need or a 
diffi cult problem, they use their creativ-
ity and imagination to devise a solution: 
“I soled my shoes with wood, which I cut 
from a tree . . . necessity is the mother of 
invention” (Jonathan Swift, Gulliver’s Trav-
els, 1726). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in its current form in 1658, but the senti-
ment it expresses is of earlier origin.
necessity knows no law  Rules and laws 
are often broken at times of emergency or 
urgent need: It went against all my principles 
to steal the food, but necessity knows no law, 
and my children were starving. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1377, in William 
Langland’s Piers Plowman: “Nede . . . hath 
no lawe.” It also exists in the Latin form 
“Necessitas non habet legem [Necessity has 
no law].”
necessity sharpens industry  Need 
makes people work harder: With heavy rain 
forecast for the following day, I knew I only had a 
few hours left to fi x the roof and I worked harder 
than ever before—necessity sharpens industry.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
need makes the old wife trot.
need makes the old wife trot  Neces-
sity provides a sense of urgency: “Stimu-
lated by the spur which maketh the 
old woman proverbially to trot, Swertha 
posted down to the hamlet, with all the 
speed of threescore” (Sir Walter Scott, 
The Pirate, 1822). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1225.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
necessity sharpens industry.
needs must when the devil drives  There 
are times when people are forced to 
do things that they would not do under 
normal circumstances: I had never killed 
an animal before, and I had no desire to kill 
this one, but needs must when the devil drives. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1450 
in the form “He must needs go that the 
devil drives.”
Variant of this proverb: needs must 
when necessity drives.
ne’er cast a clout till May be out  Do 
not stop wearing any item of warm 
winter clothing before the end of May: 
A sudden change in the weather made us glad 
that we had heeded the old proverb “Ne’er 
cast a clout till May be out.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1706, in a Span-
near is my shirt, but nearer is my skin
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   196 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
197
ish/English dictionary, in the form “Do 
not leave off your coat till May be past.” 
Clout is a British dialect word meaning 
“rag,” and the proverb is sometimes 
taken to refer to old clothes, as in Rob-
ert Graves’s The White Goddess (1948): 
“In ancient Greece, as in Britain, this 
was the month in which people went 
about in old clothes—a custom referred 
to in the proverb ‘Ne’er cast a clout ere 
May be out,’ meaning ‘do not put on 
new clothes until the unlucky month 
is over.’” It is sometimes wrongly sug-
gested that the word May in the proverb 
refers to may blossom—that is, the 
hawthorn or a similar shrub.
Variants of this proverb: change not 
a clout till May be out; what you put off 
and what you put on, never change till 
May be gone.
neglect will kill an injury sooner than 
revenge  Insults and other malicious acts 
are forgotten most quickly when the 
victim chooses to ignore them: “Neglect 
kills injuries; revenge increases them” 
(Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard’s Alma-
nack, 1733–58). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1620 in Owen Felltham’s 
Resolves, Divine, Morall, Politicall.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: forgive and forget; let bygones 
be bygones.
neither a borrower nor a lender be  It 
is advisable never to borrow or lend 
anything, specifi cally money: “Neither a 
borrower nor a lender be” is a lesson I learned 
too late, after losing $200 and the friend 
who borrowed it. The proverb comes from 
Shakespeare’s play Hamlet (1:3; 1600–01) 
and is part of Polonius’s advice to his son 
Laertes.
neither give nor take offense  Try to 
avoid offending anybody, and ignore any 
apparent slights or insults directed at you: 
The best way to avoid being drawn into an 
argument or fi ght is to follow the golden rule 
“Neither give nor take offense.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1948 in a U.S. prov-
erb collection.
Variant of this proverb: neither take 
offense nor make offense.
Nero fi ddled while Rome burned  Peo-
ple in positions of authority sometimes 
behave irresponsibly during a crisis: Nero 
fi ddled while Rome burned, and the presi-
dent was more concerned with improving his 
golf handicap than trying to avert a strike 
that would cripple the company. The prov-
erb refers to the legend that in a.d. 64 
Emperor Nero set fi re to the city of Rome 
and played his lyre while it burned.
never ask pardon before you are 
accused  If nobody knows that you have 
done something wrong, do not apologize 
and reveal your guilt—you may get away 
with it: With a bit of luck he won’t notice the 
scratch on the car where I hit the wall, so I’m 
saying nothing. My policy is “Never ask pardon 
before you are accused.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: he who excuses himself accuses 
himself.
never choose your women or linen by 
candlelight  Soft or inadequate lighting 
can give people and things a deceptively 
attractive appearance, or hide their faults 
and fl aws: The proverb “Never choose your 
women or linen by candlelight” may sound 
old-fashioned, but if you replace candlelight 
with the lights of a disco or nightclub, there 
are many young men who will vouch for its 
 never choose your women or linen by candlelight
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   197 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
198
wisdom. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1573. Other versions of the proverb 
advise against choosing gold or horses in 
this way.
Variant of this proverb: choose nei-
ther a woman nor linen by candlelight.
never do evil that good may come of it 
A wicked or immoral course of action 
cannot be vindicated by a worthy objec-
tive: She remained fi rmly opposed to animal 
experimentation—even for medical research 
into lifesaving drugs—on the basis of the 
proverb “Never do evil that good may come 
of it.” The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“And not rather (as we be slanderously 
reported, and as some affi rm that we 
say), Let us do evil, that good may come?” 
(Romans 3:8).
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the end justifies the means.
never do things by halves  Whatever 
you do, do it properly, not in a half-
hearted manner: The general did not call a 
halt until the whole town was destroyed, but 
he was never one to do things by halves. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1753 in 
Hanway’s Travels.
Variant of this proverb: do well and 
have well.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if a thing’s worth doing, it’s 
worth doing well; in for a penny, 
in for a pound; one might as well be 
hanged for a sheep as for a lamb.
never give a sucker an even break 
Foolish or gullible people are easily 
exploited and do not deserve a fair 
chance; used to justify taking advantage 
of such a person: “Never give a sucker 
an even break. . . . But your sermon has 
made me see that there is something 
higher and nobler than a code of business 
ethics” (P. G. Wodehouse, Eggs, Beans and 
Crumpets, 1940). Of uncertain origin, the 
proverb was popularized from the 1920s 
onward by the U.S. actor W. C. Fields 
(1880–1946), who wrote and starred in 
a fi lm with this title in 1941.
never is a long time  Think carefully 
before you use the word never, which implies 
a certainty about the future that you cannot 
possess: He swore that he would never betray my 
secret, but never is a long time, and I fear that I 
may live to regret taking him into my confi dence. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1721, in 
the form “Never is a long term,” but the 
sentiment it expresses occurs in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390).
Variant of this proverb: never is a 
long day.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never say never.
never judge by appearances  See judge 
not according to appearances.
never let the sun go down on your 
anger  If you have quarreled or lost your 
temper with somebody, make your peace 
before the end of the day: I believe that you 
should never let the sun go down on your anger, 
and I always insist that the children resolve any 
minor differences among themselves before they 
go to bed. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun 
go down upon your wrath” (Ephesians 
4:26).
Variant of this proverb: let not the 
sun go down on your wrath.
never let your education interfere with 
your intelligence  There are times when 
never do evil that good may come of it
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   198 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
199
you must trust your intuition or native 
wit rather than what you have been 
taught or what you have read: In emergen-
cies such as these, medical professionals often 
have to follow their common sense rather than 
their textbooks, on the basis of the saying 
“Never let your education interfere with your 
intelligence.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
an ounce of common sense is worth a 
pound of theory.
never look a gift horse in the 
mouth  When you are offered some-
thing for nothing, accept it with grati-
tude and do not fi nd fault with it: “Mr. 
Featherstone eyed him again over his 
spectacles and presented him with a little 
sheaf of notes. . . . He took them, saying, 
‘I am very much obliged to you, sir,’ and 
was going to roll them up without seem-
ing to think of their value. But this did 
not suit Mr. Featherstone, who was eying 
him intently. ‘Come, don’t you think it 
worth your while to count ’em? . . .’ ‘I 
thought I was not to look a gift-horse in 
the mouth, sir. But I shall be very happy 
to count them’” (George Eliot, Middle-
march, 1871–72). The proverb alludes to 
the practice of examining a horse’s teeth 
to ascertain its age. It was fi rst recorded 
in this form in 1546, but the sentiment 
it expresses dates from the fi fth century 
a.d. or earlier.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
beggars can’t be choosers.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: beware of greeks bearing gifts.
never marry for money, but marry where 
money is  It is good to marry somebody 
with suffi cient means for a comfortable life, 
but wealth should not be your sole criterion 
in choosing a marriage partner: She could do 
a lot worse than marry young Jack Piper, who 
has a promising legal career ahead of him. As 
my grandmother used to say, “Never marry for 
money, but marry where money is.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1870 in Alfred, Lord 
Tennyson’s “Northern Farmer.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t marry for 
money, but don’t marry without money.
never mention a rope in the house of a 
man who has been hanged  See never 
speak of rope in the house of a man 
who has been hanged.
never mix business with pleasure  Keep 
your working life separate from your pri-
vate affairs and leisure activities: They say 
you should never mix business with pleasure, 
but I see no harm in doing a little networking 
at social functions like these. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1913.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t 
mix business and pleasure.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
business is business.
never put off until tomorrow what 
you can do today  If something needs 
doing—however undesirable the task may 
be—the sooner you do it, the better: “No 
idleness, no laziness, no procrastination; 
never put off till tomorrow what you can 
do today” (Lord Chesterfi eld, letter dated 
December 26, 1749). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1616, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of earlier origin. The face-
tious variant “Never do today what you 
can put off until tomorrow” dates from 
the 19th century.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: procrastination is the thief of 
time; today is yesterday’s tomorrow.
 never put off until tomorrow what you can do today
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   199 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
200
never say A without saying B  See who 
says a must say b.
never say die  Do not surrender, stop 
trying, or give up hope: The fi rst few months 
will be very diffi cult, and you may feel that 
success is beyond your grasp, but never say die. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1837 in 
Charles Dickens’s novel The Pickwick Papers.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t give up the ship; while 
there’s life, there’s hope.
never say never  Nobody can look far 
enough into the future to say with 
certainty that something will never hap-
pen—anything is possible: “Al Marshall 
did not rule out a resumption of talks, 
saying ‘you can never say “never” in this 
business’” (Washington Post, 1984). First 
recorded in 1977, the proverb was used 
in the title of the James Bond movie 
Never Say Never Again (1983), allegedly 
because the actor Sean Connery had 
been persuaded to make a comeback 
as Agent 007, 12 years after announc-
ing that he would never play the role 
again.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never is a long time.
never sell America short  Do not belit-
tle or underestimate the potential of 
America: “Speculation ran wild, and an 
orgy of boom-or-bust trading pushed the 
bull markets up to dizzy peaks. ‘Never sell 
America short’ and ‘Be a bull on America’ 
were favorite catchwords” (Thomas A. 
Bailey, The American Pageant, 1966). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1866.
never send a boy to do a man’s job  Do 
not assign a diffi cult task to somebody 
who lacks the strength, experience, or 
qualifi cations to do it properly; also used 
of inanimate objects, such as an inad-
equate piece of equipment or a low card 
that fails to win a trick: I should have 
known better than to put O’Connor in charge 
of the investigation—never send a boy to do a 
man’s job. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1931.
never show your teeth unless you can 
bite  See if you can’t bite, never show 
your teeth.
never speak ill of the dead  You should 
not make disparaging or defamatory 
remarks about people after their death: 
I know that you should never speak ill of the 
dead, but I’m not sure that I can think of 
anything good to say about her. Of ancient 
origin, the proverb is sometimes quoted 
in its Latin form, “De mortuis nil nisi bonum 
[Say nothing but good of the dead].”
Variant of this proverb: speak well 
of the dead.
never speak of rope in the house of a 
man who has been hanged  Be tactful 
and steer clear of sensitive subjects in the 
company of people who might be upset or 
offended by them: I was just about to tell Bill 
and Maggie a funny story about my neighbor 
setting his kitchen on fi re when I remembered 
that Bill’s sister and brother-in-law were killed 
in a hotel blaze several years ago, and you 
should never speak of rope in the house of a 
man who has been hanged. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1599 in the form “A man 
ought not to make mention of a halter in 
the house of a man that was hanged.”
Variant of this proverb: never men-
tion a rope in the house of a man who has 
been hanged.
never say A without saying B
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   200 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
201
never tell tales out of school  Do not 
pass on confi dential information, secrets, 
or gossip to others, especially to outsid-
ers: New employees of the royal household are 
obliged to sign a confi dentiality document, the 
content of which can be summarized by the 
proverb “Never tell tales out of school.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1530.
never too old to learn  See it’s never 
too late to learn.
never trouble trouble till trouble trou-
bles you  Do not anticipate future prob-
lems—wait until something troublesome 
needs to be dealt with before taking any 
action: It might be better to turn a blind eye 
to the situation unless it threatens to get out 
of hand—never trouble trouble till trouble 
troubles you. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1884 in Folk-Lore Journal. It is sometimes 
quoted as part of a rhyme: “Never trouble 
trouble till trouble troubles you,/You only 
double trouble and trouble others too.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t meet troubles halfway; let 
sleeping dogs lie.
never work with children or animals  The 
unpredictability of children and animals 
make them unreliable as fellow-workers 
(a favorite maxim of actors and other 
entertainers but also used in many other 
contexts): He learned the hard way the truth 
of never working with children or animals when 
a small boy kicked him in the shin and he was 
bitten by a pet rat, both on camera. A proverb 
of U.S. origin, it was popularized by (and 
possibly coined by) comedian W. C. Fields.
a new broom sweeps clean  When a 
new person takes up a position of author-
ity in an organization, he or she is likely 
to make radical changes: “New brooms 
sweep clean. Abbot Thomas, like most of 
his predecessors, began with attempts at 
reformation” (J. A. Froude, Short Studies, 
1877). First recorded in 1546, the prov-
erb has given rise to the fi gurative phrase 
new broom meaning “somebody newly 
appointed to a position of authority”: Talk 
about a new broom! When the new principal 
came into school she reorganized everything—
and everyone!—in her fi rst term.
Variant of this proverb: a new broom 
sweeps clean, but an old broom knows all 
the corners.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
new lords, new laws.
a new day, a new dollar  See another 
day, another dollar.
new lords, new laws  When a new ruler 
or government comes to power—or 
when a new person takes control of a 
situation—changes are made and differ-
ent rules apply: “‘What’s yer hurry then, 
Laban?’ inquired Coggan. ‘You used to 
bide as late as the latest.’ ‘Well, ye see, 
neighbours, I was lately married to a 
woman, and she’s my vocation now. . . . ’ 
The young man halted lamely. ‘New lords 
new laws, as the saying is, I suppose,’ 
remarked Coggan” (Thomas Hardy, Far 
from the Madding Crowd, 1874). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in the mid-16th 
century, but with the implication that it 
had long been in general use.
Variant of this proverb: new lairds 
make new laws.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a new broom sweeps clean.
nice guys fi nish last  It is sometimes 
necessary to be ruthless and aggressive—
 nice guys fi nish last
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   201 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
202
even cruel or unscrupulous—to get what 
you want: He’s the kindest, most considerate 
person I’ve ever worked with, but he’s a loser—
everybody knows that nice guys fi nish last. 
The proverb was coined in the mid-20th 
century by the U.S. baseball manager Leo 
Durocher and used in 1975 as the title of 
his autobiography.
night brings counsel  If you have a dif-
fi cult problem to solve or an important 
decision to make, a good night’s sleep 
will work wonders: Night brings counsel, 
and I woke up the following morning with a 
new plan of action that couldn’t possibly fail. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in 1590, in Edmund Spenser’s The Faerie 
Queene, but the sentiment it expresses is 
of ancient origin: the Greek poet and dra-
matist Menander (c. 342–292 b.c.) wrote, 
“at night comes counsel to the wise.”
nine tailors make a man  A well-dressed 
person does not buy all his or her clothes 
from the same source: They say that nine 
tailors make a man, so don’t be afraid of sporting 
several different designer labels at the same time. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1647; its variant form was fi rst recorded 
34 years earlier. The original sense was that 
a gentleman should choose his garments 
from a wide range of tailors. The expression 
is also sometimes linked to bell-ringing: a 
tailor being a teller or “stroke” in a funeral 
knell: nine tailors referred to a man (six, a 
woman; three, a child); compare Dorothy 
Sayers’s mystery The Nine Tailors (1934).
Variant of this proverb: two tailors 
go to a man.
nobody believes a liar when he speaks 
the truth  See a liar is not believed 
when he tells the truth.
nobody ever went broke underestimat-
ing the intelligence of the American 
people  There is much money to be made 
by exploiting the gullibility or poor taste 
of the general public: It should have been 
obvious to anybody that the devices couldn’t pos-
sibly work, but they sold like hotcakes—nobody 
ever went broke underestimating the intelligence 
of the American people. The proverb was 
coined in 1926 by the U.S. journalist H. L. 
Mencken in the form “No one in this world 
. . . has ever lost money by underestimat-
ing the intelligence of the great masses of 
the plain people.” The word intelligence is 
sometimes replaced by taste.
nobody forgets a good teacher  A good 
teacher is long remembered by his or her 
pupils: “They were surprised by the num-
ber of people who wanted to add their 
names to the tribute, but nobody forgets 
a good teacher.” It appears to be a prov-
erb of 20th-century invention. It enjoyed 
renewed circulation in the late 1990s as 
the slogan of a UK government campaign 
to recruit more teachers.
nobody is above the law  Everybody 
must obey the law of the land: “Declaring 
that ‘no one is above the law,’ a federal 
prosecutor yesterday urged that former 
Pentagon offi cial Paul Thayer be put behind 
bars for his part in a $3 million illegal stock 
trading scheme” (Boston Globe, 1985). The 
proverb comes from a speech made by 
President Theodore Roosevelt in 1903.
Variant of this proverb: no man is 
above the law, and no man is below it.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the king can do no wrong.
nobody is born learned; bishops are 
made of men  Education and scholar-
night brings counsel
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   202 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
203
ship are not innate qualities, and anybody 
can acquire knowledge or aspire to high 
offi ce: When students try to blame their failure 
or lack of ambition on a deprived family back-
ground, I remind them of the saying “Nobody is 
born learned; bishops are made of men.”
nobody is indispensable  Nobody is so 
important or well qualifi ed that he or 
she cannot be replaced by another: The 
dismissal of the vice president was a salutary 
reminder that nobody is indispensable in this 
organization.
Variant of this proverb: no man is 
necessary.
nobody is infallible  Nobody can claim 
to be always right and never to have made 
a mistake: She may be the world’s greatest 
expert on the subject, but nobody is infallible, 
and in this case I am sure she is wrong. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1880.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: homer sometimes nods; to err is 
human, to forgive divine.
nobody is perfect  Everybody has his 
or her faults; often said in response to 
criticism. “We ain’t none of us perfect 
that I knows of ” (L. Hollingworth, Death 
Leaves Us Naked, 1931). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1805, in Gouverneur 
Morris’s Diary of the French Revolution.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let him who is without sin cast the 
first stone.
nobody should be judge in his own 
cause  People cannot be objective in 
matters that concern themselves: “No man 
is a good judge in his own cause. I believe 
I am tolerably impartial” (John Wesley, let-
ter dated November 3, 1775). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded c. 1449 and is a 
translation of the Latin legal maxim “Nemo 
debet esse iudex in propria causa.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
men are blind in their own cause.
a nod’s as good as a wink to a blind 
horse  In certain circumstances only the 
smallest hint is needed to make yourself 
understood; also used to imply that any 
kind of hint is wasted on somebody who 
is determined not to take it: “You needn’t 
say no more—a nod’s as good as a wink to 
a blind horse” (Sean O’Casey, The Shadow 
of a Gunman, 1925). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1794, in William Godwin’s 
novel Caleb Williams.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a word to the wise is sufficient.
no good deed goes unpunished  When 
you do something kind or helpful you 
often get something unpleasant in return; 
a cynical observation: A million dollars had 
been spent on a new gym for the prison earlier 
in the year, but no good deed goes unpunished, 
and the rioting prisoners found some useful 
makeshift weapons among the new equipment. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1938 in 
the form “Every good deed brings its own 
punishment.” It has been attributed to a 
number of people, including the writers 
Oscar Wilde and Clare Boothe Luce, but 
it is of unknown origin.
no joy without annoy  Happiness is 
always accompanied by some sorrow or 
trouble: No joy without annoy, but we were 
determined not to let the bad news from 
home spoil our honeymoon. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “For 
evere the latter ende of joye is wo.”
 no joy without annoy
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   203 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
204
Variant of this proverb: no joy with-
out alloy.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
there’s no pleasure without pain; 
there’s no rose without a thorn.
no man can call again yesterday  See 
yesterday will not be called again.
no man can serve two masters  Nobody 
can be loyal or committed to two differ-
ent causes, organizations or employers 
simultaneously: “Men cannot serve two 
masters. If this cant of serving their coun-
try once takes hold of them, good-bye 
to the authority of the Church” (George 
Bernard Shaw, Saint Joan, 1924). The 
proverb is of biblical origin: “No man can 
serve two masters: for either he will hate 
the one, and love the other; or else he will 
hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye 
cannot serve God and mammon” (Mat-
thew 6:24).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: you can’t serve god and mammon; 
you can’t run with the hare and 
hunt with the hounds.
no man is above the law, and no man is 
below it  See nobody is above the law.
no man is a hero to his valet  The bet-
ter you know somebody, with all his or 
her faults and weaknesses, the less likely 
you are to regard that person with awe 
or veneration: “It has been said . . . that 
no man is a hero to his valet de chambre; 
now I am afraid when you and I grow a 
little more intimate . . . you will be hor-
ribly disappointed in your high expecta-
tions” (Samuel Foote, The Patron, 1764). 
The proverb is attributed to the Parisian 
hostess Anne-Marie Bigot de Cornuel 
(1605–94), in the French form “Il n’y a 
pas de héros pour son valet-de-chambre,” but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin. Lord Byron turned the proverb 
around to express high praise in his mock-
heroic poem Beppo (1818): “In short, he 
was a perfect cavaliero,/And to his very 
valet seem’d a hero.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
familiarity breeds contempt.
no man is an island  Nobody can func-
tion in total isolation from the rest of soci-
ety: Those who aim for self-suffi ciency—in a 
material or spiritual sense—eventually discover 
that no man is an island; we are all dependent, 
to a greater or lesser extent, on one another. 
The proverb comes from the English poet 
John Donne’s “Devotions upon Emergent 
Occasions” (1624): “No man is an Island, 
entire of it self; every man is a piece of the 
Continent, a part of the main.”
no man is necessary  See nobody is 
indispensable.
no moon, no man  According to popular 
superstition, a child born at the time of 
the new moon—that is, when there is no 
moon visible in the sky—will not survive 
to adulthood: “‘No moon, no man.’ ’Tis 
one of the truest sayings ever spit out. The 
boy never comes to anything that’s born at 
new moon” (Thomas Hardy, The Return of 
the Native, 1879). The quotation is the fi rst 
recorded use of the proverb, but implies 
that it is already well known.
no names, no pack-drill  If no names 
are mentioned, nobody can be punished 
or held responsible for something: The 
report does not specify which companies are the 
worst offenders—no names, no pack-drill. The 
no man can call again yesterday
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   204 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
205
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1923 (O. 
Onions, Peace in our Time). Pack-drill is a 
form of military punishment that involves 
marching up and down with a full load of 
equipment.
none but the brave deserve the 
fair  Those who lack boldness or cour-
age do not deserve to achieve great things; 
also used more literally, of men courting 
women—or vice versa: Firmly believing—
at the tender age of ten—that none but the 
brave deserve the fair, she spurned the advances 
of any boy who couldn’t hold his own in a 
playground battle. The proverb comes from 
John Dryden’s poem “Alexander’s Feast” 
(1697), referring to Alexander the Great 
and the courtesan Thais: “Happy, happy, 
happy pair! . . . /None but the brave 
deserves the fair.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
faint heart never won fair lady.
no news is good news  It is probably 
safe to assume that all is well if you 
have not heard anything to the contrary: 
“Everywhere, women gathered in knots, 
huddled in groups . . . telling each other 
that no news is good news, trying to com-
fort each other” (Margaret Mitchell, Gone 
with the Wind, 1936). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1616 in the form “No news is 
better than evil news.”
no pain, no gain  Nothing can be 
achieved without effort, suffering, or 
hardship; often applied specifi cally to 
physical exercise: Some medical experts 
are concerned that those who follow the phi-
losophy of “No pain, no gain” in their sports 
training could be doing irreparable dam-
age to their bodies. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1577 in the form “They must 
take pain that look for any gain.” The 
more concise form “No pains, no gains” 
was used in 1648 as the title of a poem 
by Robert Herrick.
Variants of this proverb: there are no 
gains without pains; no sweat, no sweet.
no penny, no paternoster  Religious 
services must be paid for in advance; also 
loosely applied to any similar business 
arrangement: I accept that the church needs 
to raise money for essential repairs, but to me 
this new appeal, with the conditions attached to 
it, smacks of the old motto “No penny, no pater-
noster.” The proverb was fi rst re cord ed in 
1528, but with the implication that it was 
already in common use.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
nothing for nothing.
the north wind doth blow and we shall 
have snow  Winds that blow from the 
north often bring cold weather with them: 
Everyone in this part of the world knows that 
when the north wind doth blow snow is surely 
on the way. The proverb has its origins in 
a nursery rhyme: “The north wind doth 
blows,/And we shall have snow,/And 
what will poor Robin do then? Poor 
thing!” (Songs for Nursery, 1805).
no sweat, no sweet  See no pain, no 
gain.
nothing can bring you peace but your-
self  Do not rely on others for reas-
surance, contentment, or security: After 
wasting thousands of dollars on therapists and 
analysts, she came to the conclusion that there 
is a lot of truth in the saying “Nothing can 
bring you peace but yourself. ” The proverb 
comes from Ralph Waldo Emerson’s essay 
“Self-Reliance” (1841).
 nothing can bring you peace but yourself
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   205 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
206
nothing comes of nothing  Nothing 
can be produced from nothing, therefore 
everything must originate from some-
thing; also used to imply that if you do or 
contribute nothing, you will get nothing 
in return: “You are to give me all your 
business. . . . If you have none, the learned 
gentleman here knows nothing can come 
of nothing” (Sir Walter Scott, The Heart of 
Midlothian, 1818). The proverb occurs in 
the writings of the Greek poet Alcaeus 
(sixth century b.c.) and also exists in the 
Latin form “Ex nihilo nihil fi t.” The variant 
“Nothing will come of nothing” comes 
from Shakespeare’s play King Lear (1:1).
Variants of this proverb: nothing will 
come of nothing; from nothing, nothing 
is made.
nothing for nothing  Everything must 
be paid for, in money or in kind: Nothing 
for nothing—you get me a seat on the next 
fl ight to Rio, and I’ll give you a story that’ll 
knock everything else off the front page. The 
proverb dates from before 1704.
Variants of this proverb: you get 
nothing for nothing; you never get any-
thing for nothing.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: no penny, no paternoster; you 
don’t get something for nothing.
nothing goes over the back but that 
comes under the belly  See what’s got 
over the devil’s back is spent under 
his belly.
nothing is certain but death and 
taxes  Death will come to everybody 
and taxes must be paid, but everything 
else in life is unpredictable, insecure, or 
avoidable: “Everything’s more or less a 
gamble. . . . Nothing is certain but death 
and taxes” (Laura Ingalls Wilder, By the 
Shores of Silver Lake, 1939). Although 
Daniel Defoe used the phrase “things 
as certain as death and taxes” in 1726, 
the proverb is generally associated with 
Benjamin Franklin, who wrote in a let-
ter dated November 13, 1789, “In this 
world nothing can be said to be certain, 
except death and taxes.”
nothing is certain but the unfore-
seen  The one thing that is sure to 
happen is the thing that nobody expects 
or is prepared for; also used to imply 
that nothing can be predicted: If it is true 
that nothing is certain but the unforeseen, 
then surely it is impossible to insure yourself 
against all eventualities. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1886, but with the 
implication that it was already in general 
use.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the unexpected always happens.
nothing is given so freely as advice  Peo-
ple are at their most generous when it 
comes to telling others what they should 
and should not do: When I asked for sugges-
tions about tackling the problem, my friends 
readily offered ideas and I discovered the truth 
of the saying “Nothing is given so freely as 
advice,” but when it came to getting practical 
or fi nancial assistance, the phrase “like pulling 
teeth” was more applicable.
nothing is impossible to a willing 
heart  Anything can be achieved by 
somebody with the will to succeed: He was 
one of those infuriating people who believe that 
there is no such word as “can’t,” and that noth-
ing is impossible to a willing heart. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in Stephen Hawes’s 
Passetyme of Pleasure (1509).
nothing comes of nothing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   206 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
207
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
where there’s a will there’s a way.
nothing should be done in haste but 
gripping a fl ea  There are very few 
things that need to be done quickly; said 
by somebody urged to hurry up: “Don’t 
be impatient,” she said, pouring herself another 
cup of coffee. “Nothing should be done in haste 
but gripping a fl ea.” The proverb dates 
from before 1655 in the form “Do noth-
ing rashly, but catching of fl eas.”
nothing so bad but it might have been 
worse  Try to take a positive view of 
misfortune—things are never as bad as 
they could be: I broke a leg, both arms, and 
several ribs, but at least I’m still alive—noth-
ing so bad but it might have been worse. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1876. A 
more pessimistic corollary is “Nothing so 
good but it might have been better.”
Variant of this proverb: from the day 
you were born till you ride in a hearse, 
there’s nothing so bad but it might have 
been worse.
nothing so bold as a blind mare  Those 
who are ignorant or unaware of danger 
proceed without fear or caution: Nothing so 
bold as a blind mare, and those who have the least 
understanding of how a plane fl ies usually have 
the fewest qualms about traveling by air. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1721 (James Kelly, Scottish Proverbs) but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin.
nothing succeeds like success  Success-
ful people go on to ever greater things; 
also used to imply that people are more 
respected or accepted after they succeed: 
“Nothing succeeds like success, and if 
Hitler had founded his empire . . . we 
can well imagine how later historians 
would have treated him” (Hugh Trevor-
Roper, History and Imagination, 1980). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in A. D. 
Richardson’s Beyond Mississippi (1867).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
success breeds success.
nothing ventured, nothing gained  You 
will not achieve anything unless you are 
prepared to make an attempt or take a 
risk: I knew that my suggestion would probably 
be greeted with ridicule, but this did not deter 
me—nothing ventured, nothing gained. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English c. 
1385, in Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde, in 
the form: “He which that nothing under-
taketh,/Nothyng n’acheveth.”
Variants of this proverb: nothing ven-
ture, nothing gain; nothing venture, noth-
ing have; nothing venture, nothing win.
nothing will come of nothing  See noth-
ing comes of nothing.
no tree takes so deep a root as preju-
dice  Once prejudice becomes estab-
lished—in a person’s mind or in society 
as a whole—it is very diffi cult to eradicate 
it: No tree takes so deep a root as prejudice, and 
neither education nor legislation can eliminate 
racial hatred that is handed down from genera-
tion to generation.
nought is never in danger  Persons or 
things of no value are at no risk of being 
stolen: He never bothered to lock the house 
behind him, as nought is never in danger. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 
in J. Clarke’s Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina.
nurture passes nature  The way in which 
a person is brought up counts for more 
 nurture passes nature
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   207 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
208
than any instinctive skills they may have 
been born with: It is a fundamental prin-
ciple of modern education that nurture passes 
nature. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1611 in Randle Cotgrave’s A Dictionary of 
the French and English Tongues.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: nature passes nurture.
nurture passes nature