209
obey orders, if you break owners  Do as 
you are commanded, even if this means 
doing something you know to be foolish 
or wrong: Provided that you follow the golden 
rule, “Obey orders, if you break owners,” nobody 
can hold you responsible for anything that 
goes wrong. Of nautical origin, the proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1823, 
but with the implication that it had long 
been in use.
the obvious choice is usually a quick 
regret  Think carefully before you make 
a selection or decision: Are you sure she is 
the best candidate for the job? Remember that 
the obvious choice is usually a quick regret.
offenders never pardon  Those who do 
wrong themselves are the least likely to 
forgive others’ wrongdoing: I was not 
surprised by his intolerant attitude, bearing 
in mind his own record—it’s well known that 
offenders never pardon. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in George Herbert’s Out-
landish Proverbs (1640).
of two evils choose the less  See choose 
the lesser of two evils.
oil and water do not mix  Some people 
or things are incompatible by nature: Put-
ting people with such different temperaments 
in the same team is a recipe for disaster—oil 
and water do not mix. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1783. It also occurs in 
the form of the simile like oil and water, 
applied to incompatible people or things.
Variant of this proverb: oil and vin-
egar will not mix.
an old dog will learn no tricks  See you 
can’t teach an old dog new tricks.
the older the wiser  The older a person 
gets, the wiser he or she becomes: She 
tried to put the affair behind her and rue-
fully told herself “the older the wiser.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in J. Clarke, 
Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina (1639).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: experience is the mother of wis-
dom; live and learn.
an old fool is the worst fool  See there’s 
no fool like an old fool.
an old fox is not easily snared  A person 
with years of experience is unlikely to 
be easily fooled: They tried to ambush him 
on the way home, but an old fox is not easily 
snared. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
R. Taverner, Proverbs or Adages with New 
Additions, gathered out of the Chiliades of 
Erasmus (1539).
o
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   209 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
210
Variant of this proverb: old foxes 
want no tutors.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
with age comes wisdom.
old friends and old wine are best 
Friendships that have stood the test of 
time are, like old wine, the best: “Old 
wine and an old friend are good provi-
sions.” (G. Herbert, Outlandish Proverbs, 
1640). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
T. Draxe, Bibliotheca Scholastica (1633).
Variant of this proverb: old friends 
and old wine and old gold are best.
old habits die hard  When you have 
been doing a particular thing—or doing 
something in a particular way—for a long 
time, it is very diffi cult to change: “Old 
habits die hard. Police offi cers who were 
trained to pump the brakes have been 
crashing a lot of police cars equipped with 
anti-lock brakes” (Washington Times, 1995). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1758 in 
the form “Habits are hard to break.”
old maids lead apes in hell Women 
who die unmarried are doomed to share 
the company of apes in the afterworld: 
“Get you to heaven, Beatrice, get you to 
heaven; here’s no place for you maids: 
so deliver I up my apes” (William Shake-
speare, Much Ado about Nothing, 2:1). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1575 in 
George Gascoigne’s Posies.
an old poacher makes the best game-
keeper  A reformed wrongdoer is good 
at preventing others from committing 
the same crime or offense, because he 
or she can understand their thinking 
and anticipate their actions: “What the 
Church needed, possibly, was a good 
leavening of sinners in its ministry, on 
the principle that poachers make the 
best gamekeepers” (Victor Canning, The 
Great Affair, 1970). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1878, but the 
sentiment it expresses occurs in Chau-
cer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “A theef 
of venysoun, that hath forlaft/His liker-
ousnesse and al his olde craft,/Kan kepe a 
forest best of any man.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
set a thief to catch a thief.
old sins cast long shadows  The pas-
sage of time often has the effect of making 
past wrongdoing seem greater or more 
signifi cant than it actually was: His sense of 
guilt increased as the years went by—old sins 
cast long shadows, as they say—and ultimately 
drove him to suicide. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1924, but the sentiment it 
ex presses is of earlier origin: in his play 
Aglaura (1638), Sir John Suckling wrote, 
“Our sins, like to our shadowes,/When 
our day is in its glorie scarce appear:/
To wards our evening how great and mon-
strous they are!”
Variant of this proverb: old sins have 
long shadows.
old soldiers never die  Those who have 
served in the armed forces and survived 
warfare often live so long that they seem 
indestructible: I saw Jack Stuart in the bar 
the other day, regaling some of the youngsters 
with his army stories. He must be well into 
his nineties by now—I guess it’s true that 
old soldiers never die. The proverb comes 
from a popular song of World War I: 
“Old soldiers never die,/They simply fade 
away.” A facetious variant is “Old soldiers 
never die—they just smell that way.” The 
proverb may be applied to other classes 
old friends and old wine are best
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   210 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
211
of people or things by replacing the word 
soldiers. It has prompted numerous pun-
ning variants, such as “Old bankers never 
die, they just yield to maturity” and “Old 
insurance agents never die, it’s against 
their policy.”
old trees can’t be transplanted  See 
you can’t shift an old tree without 
it dying.
once a priest, always a priest  People 
cannot change their vocation; also used 
to imply that people continue to behave 
in accordance with the habits and train-
ing of their trade or profession even 
after they have left it: “You must be 
quite sure . . . that you have a voca-
tion because it would be terrible if you 
found afterwards that you had none. 
Once a priest always a priest, remember” 
(James Joyce, A Portrait of the Artist as a 
Young Man, 1916). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1859, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier ori-
gin. Other words may be substituted for 
priest when the proverb is used of other 
occupations.
once a thief, always a thief  Wrong-
doers cannot change their nature and can 
never be trusted: However tolerant and broad-
minded they may be in their private lives, many 
employers apply the principle “Once a thief, 
always a thief ” when it comes to considering job 
applications from people with criminal records. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1622 in 
the form “Once a knave and ever a knave.” 
Other words may be substituted for thief, 
such as crook, drunkard, fool, or whore, and 
the proverb is occasionally applied to those 
with enduring virtues rather than persistent 
vices, as in “Once a lady, always a lady.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the leopard can’t change its spots.
once bitten, twice shy  Somebody who 
has had a bad experience is reluctant to 
do the same thing again: She swore that she 
would never remarry—once bitten, twice shy. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1894.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: once burned, twice shy; a burnt 
child dreads the fire.
once burned, twice shy  People who 
have suffered as a result of a previous 
experience tend to be cautious in their 
approach to similar situations: “She was 
especially on her guard . . . because she’d 
been victimized in a stupid swindle her-
self, recently. Once burned, twice shy, 
you know” (Stewart Sterling, Dead Sure, 
1949). The quotation is the fi rst recorded 
use of the proverb in this form.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: once bitten, twice shy; a burnt 
child dreads the fire.
one bad apple spoils the lot  See the 
rotten apple spoils the barrel.
one business begets another When one 
business prospers, other businesses are 
likely to start up: Within weeks the high 
street was full of shops selling fast food, but 
as they say, one business begets another. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1528 in 
Thomas More’s Works: “It is an olde said 
saw, that one busynes begetteth and bryn-
geth forth another.”
one cannot be in two places at once 
Nobody can deal with two different 
things or attend two different events in 
 one cannot be in two places at once
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   211 1/29/07   5:12:53 PM
212
two different places at the same time; 
said when confl icting demands are made 
on somebody, or when a choice has to 
be made between confl icting options: 
I would love to go to the show, but I don’t 
want to miss my evening class, and one cannot 
be in two places at once. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1611, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t be 
in two places at the same time.
one cannot love and be wise  People 
often show a lack of common sense or 
good judgment when they are in love: 
“To tax and to please, no more than to 
love and to be wise, is not given to men” 
(Edmund Burke, On American Taxation, 
1775). The proverb has been traced back 
to the writings of Publilius Syrus (fi rst 
century b.c.): “amare et saper vix deo con-
ceditur [to love and to be wise is scarcely 
allowed to God].”
one courageous thought will put to fl ight 
a host of troubles  A strong and positive 
mental attitude is the best defense against 
anxiety or adversity: Keep your spirits up, 
and remember that one courageous thought will 
put to fl ight a host of troubles.
one enemy is too much  Having even 
a single enemy in the world is danger-
ous: “One enemy is too much for a man 
in a great post, and a hundred friends 
are too few” (H.G. Bohn, A Hand-Book 
of Proverbs, 1855). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1640 in George Herbert’s 
Outlandish Proverbs.
one for sorrow; two for mirth; three for 
a wedding; four for a birth  According 
to popular superstition, the number of 
magpies seen on a particular occasion 
portends sadness, happiness, and so on: 
A magpie landed on the fence and I anxiously 
looked around for its mate, the old rhyme “One 
for sorrow, two for mirth” running through my 
mind. The proverb comes from a tradi-
tional rhyme, fi rst recorded in the nine-
teenth century, that continues: “fi ve for 
silver; six for gold; seven for a secret not 
to be told; eight for heaven; nine for hell; 
and ten for the devil’s own sel [self].”
Variant of this proverb: one for sor-
row, two for joy, three for a girl, and four 
for a boy.
one for the mouse, one for the crow, one 
to rot, one to grow  It is advisable not 
to expect a yield of more than 25 percent 
when sowing seed: Don’t sow the seed too 
thinly if you want a good crop—remember the 
old saying “One for the mouse, one for the crow, 
one to rot, and one to grow.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1850.
Variant of this proverb: one for wind 
and one for crow, one to die and one to 
grow.
one funeral makes many  Standing 
around a grave on a cold or rainy day is 
not good for the health, and can prove fatal 
for those attending a funeral: “It has been 
said . . . that one funeral makes many. A 
strong east wind . . . whistled through the 
crowd of mourners” (R. D. Blackmore, 
Perlycross, 1894). The quotation is the fi rst 
recorded use of the proverb.
one good turn deserves another  Acts of 
kindness or assistance should be recipro-
cated; often said when returning a favor: 
“But one good turn deserves another—in 
that case, you must . . . dine with me” (Sir 
one cannot love and be wise
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   212 1/29/07   5:12:53 PM
213
Walter Scott, St. Ronan’s Well, 1824). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English at 
the beginning of the 15th century, but a 
French equivalent was in use in the early 
14th century.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you scratch my back and i’ll scratch 
yours.
one half of the world doesn’t know how 
the other half lives  People have no 
conception or understanding of the prob-
lems and pleasures of everyday life for 
those in other social classes, occupations, 
or countries; chiefl y used of the contrast 
between rich and poor: The famous remark 
“Let them eat cake,” allegedly made by Marie 
Antoinette on learning that her people had 
no bread, is a classic illustration of the saying 
“One half of the world doesn’t know how the 
other half lives.” First recorded in Eng-
lish in 1607, the proverb occurs in the 
French satirist François Rabelais’s novel 
Pantagruel (1532): “la moytié du monde ne 
sçait comment l’autre vit.” It has given rise 
to the fi gurative phrase how the other half 
lives, referring to a lifestyle very different 
from your own.
Variant of this proverb: half the world 
knows not how the other half lives.
one hand for yourself and one for the 
ship  Do not neglect your own safety, 
security, or well-being for the sake of 
your work or your employers; also used 
literally as a safety maxim for those 
working at sea: He gave the company every-
thing he had for most of his working life, and 
what good did it do him? I’m determined 
not to follow in his footsteps—my motto is 
“One hand for yourself and one for the ship.” 
Of nautical origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1799.
one hand washes the other  People 
cooperate and help one another, and 
expect favors to be reciprocated: We 
were not surprised to learn that the main-
tenance contract for the party headquarters 
had been won by our rivals, who made such a 
generous contribution to the party’s last elec-
tion campaign—one hand washes the other. 
First recorded in English in 1573, the 
proverb is of ancient origin, occurring 
in the works of the Greek poet Epichar-
mus (c. 540–450 b.c.).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you scratch my back and i’ll scratch 
yours.
one hour’s sleep before midnight is 
worth two after  Those who go to bed 
early have a more refreshing night’s sleep 
than those who rise late in the morning: I 
was well aware of the saying “One hour’s sleep 
before midnight is worth two after,” but in my 
fi rst year at college I never actually managed 
to put it to the test. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1640 in George Herbert’s 
Outlandish Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: one hour’s 
sleep before midnight is worth three 
after.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
early to bed and early to rise, makes a 
man healthy, wealthy, and wise.
one law for the rich and another for 
the poor  It sometimes seems that 
rich people are treated more leniently 
by the legal system than poor people: 
“Now, if the husbands and fathers of 
these ladies,—those who have them-
selves enacted the laws,—wink at their 
infringement, why should not others do 
so? . . . There cannot be one law for the 
rich and another for the poor” (Captain 
 one law for the rich and another for the poor
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   213 1/29/07   5:12:53 PM
214
Marryat, The King’s Own, 1830). The 
quotation is the fi rst recorded use of the 
proverb.
Variant of this proverb: there’s one 
law for the rich and another for the poor.
one lie leads to another  Once you 
have told one lie, it is often necessary to 
continue lying to maintain the deception: 
I had previously told them I wasn’t married, so 
when my wife arrived I had to introduce her as 
my sister—one lie leads to another. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1534.
Variants of this proverb: one lie 
begets another; one lie makes many; one 
seldom meets a lonely lie.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what a tangled web we weave when 
first we practice to deceive.
one man’s loss is another man’s 
gain  People profi t from the misfor-
tunes of others; also used more literally: 
One man’s loss is another man’s gain, and our 
takings doubled when the bar next door closed 
down. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1527 in the form “What one wins, 
another loses.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any 
good.
one man’s meat is another man’s poison 
What one person likes, another person 
dislikes: The show had good reviews in the 
national press, but one man’s meat is another 
man’s poison, and I didn’t enjoy it at all. First 
recorded in English c. 1576, the prov-
erb is of ancient origin: in his De Rerum 
Natura (fi rst century b.c.), the Roman 
poet Lucretius wrote, “quod ali cibus est 
aliis fuat acre venenum [what is food to one 
person may be bitter poison to others].”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every man to his taste; tastes 
differ; there’s no accounting for 
tastes.
one man’s trash is another man’s trea-
sure  Many people prize things that oth-
ers would not give houseroom to: Nobody 
who has ever been to a yard sale or fl ea market 
can dispute the truth of the saying “One man’s 
trash is another man’s treasure.”
one might as well be hanged for a sheep 
as for a lamb  If you are going to suffer 
or be punished for something, you might as 
well get the maximum pleasure or benefi t 
from it: When the cakes arrived, she decided 
to ignore her diet and helped herself to a large 
cream puff, probably the most fattening item on 
the plate. “One might as well be hanged for a 
sheep as for a lamb,” she said with a guilty smile. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1678.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
in for a penny, in for a pound.
one nail drives out another  One thing 
replaces another, or new ideas or customs 
cause old ones to fall into disuse: “As one 
nail by strength drives out another,/So 
the remembrance of my former love/Is by 
a newer object quite forgotten” (William 
Shakespeare, The Two Gentlemen of Verona, 
1591). The proverb is of ancient origin, 
and was known to the Greek philosopher 
Aristotle in the fourth century b.c.
one of these days is none of these 
days  Somebody who says he or she will 
do something “one of these days”—that 
is, at some unspecifi ed future time—will 
probably never do it; said in response to 
such a person: “One of these days I must go 
through my wardrobe and get rid of all the 
one lie leads to another
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   214 1/29/07   5:12:53 PM
215
clothes I never wear.” “One of these days is 
none of these days. If you don’t get on and do 
it you’ll have to buy a new wardrobe!” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in Comes Fac-
undus (1658).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
tomorrow never comes.
one picture is worth ten thousand 
words  Visual images are often the most 
concise and effective means of expres-
sion: They say that one picture is worth ten 
thousand words, and if you ask somebody to 
name a memorable news story from the past, 
the chances are that he or she will describe the 
photograph that accompanied it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1927 by Frederick 
R. Barnard in Printers’ Ink.
Variant of this proverb: a picture is 
worth a thousand words.
one seldom meets a lonely lie  See one 
lie leads to another.
one step at a time  Do not rush at things 
or try to do too much at once—if you 
proceed slowly and carefully, things will 
seem less daunting and you will be less 
likely to make mistakes: “I did not allow 
myself to think of ultimate escape. . . . 
One step at a time was enough” (John 
Buchan, Mr. Standfast, 1919). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in C. M. Yonge’s Heir of 
Redclyffe (1853).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
life is hard by the yard, but by the 
inch life’s a cinch.
one story is good till another is 
told  People are happy to accept one idea 
until a new idea comes along to replace it: 
“A theory is not proved . . . because the 
evidence in its favour looks well at fi rst 
sight. . . . ‘One story is good till another 
is told!’” (Thomas Babington Macaulay, in 
the Edinburgh Review, 1831). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1593 in the form 
“One tale is always good until another is 
heard.”
one swallow does not make a summer 
You cannot generalize from a single 
occurrence: One swallow does not make a 
summer, and the fact that she won the fi rst race 
of the season does not prove that she is worthy 
of selection for the Olympic team. The prov-
erb is of ancient Greek and Latin origin 
in the form “One swallow does not make 
a spring.”
Variant of this proverb: one swallow 
makes not a spring, nor one woodchuck 
a winter.
one sword keeps another in its scab-
bard  Showing that you are ready and 
able to defend yourself is a good way of 
discouraging others from attacking you: 
“The proverb ‘One sword drawn keeps 
the other in the scabbard’ was verifi ed, the 
hostile preparations led to negociations, 
and the question was settled without fi ght-
ing” (Frederick Chamier, Ben Brace, 1836). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1640. 
The nuclear deterrent is a modern illustra-
tion of the sentiment it expresses.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you want peace, prepare for war.
one thief robs another People who are 
dishonest will not scruple to steal from 
each other. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1510 in A. Barclay’s Eclogues in the 
form: “It is ill stealing from a thiefe.”
one volunteer is worth two pressed 
men  Those who volunteer for work or 
 one volunteer is worth two pressed men
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   215 1/29/07   5:12:53 PM
216
service are generally more effi cient and 
reliable than those who are forced to do 
it against their will: We never turn away 
anybody who offers to help, on the principle 
that one volunteer is worth two pressed men. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1705 in 
T. Hearne’s Journal.
Variant of this proverb: a volunteer is 
worth ten pressed men.
one wedding brings another  The 
romantic atmosphere of a wedding may 
have an effect on unmarried guests, 
prompting other couples to get engaged 
or sparking off new relationships that 
will lead to the altar: My son was a bit 
nervous when his new girlfriend invited him 
to her sister’s wedding—one wedding brings 
another, and he doesn’t want it to be his! The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1634, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
general use.
one year’s seeding makes seven years’ 
weeding  If you allow weeds to seed 
themselves, it will take a long time to get 
rid of all the new plants they produce; 
also used fi guratively of the need to eradi-
cate something undesirable before it has a 
chance to spread, or to warn people that 
their actions can have lasting repercus-
sions: Weeds are not only unsightly, but also a 
potential source of trouble for the future—one 
year’s seeding makes seven years’ weeding. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1866 in the 
form “One year’s seeding may cost ten 
years’ weeding.”
the only difference between stumbling 
blocks and stepping-stones is the way 
you use them  Be positive in your 
approach to obstacles that lie in your 
path, and try to turn them to your advan-
tage: I fi rmly believe that the only difference 
between stumbling blocks and stepping-stones 
is the way you use them, and although my fi rst 
few job applications were unsuccessful, they 
gave me the opportunity to hone my skills as 
an interviewee. This proverb is recorded 
as a regional expression in the United 
States.
the only place where success comes 
before work is in a dictionary  Nobody 
succeeds without fi rst making an effort: 
Remember that the only place where success 
comes before work is in a dictionary, and if you 
want to make a go of this business you need to 
focus all your time and attention on it.
the only thing a heated argument 
ever produced is coolness  An angry 
exchange of words resolves nothing and 
leads to a breakdown of friendly relations: 
If you sit down and discuss your differences 
calmly and rationally, you may ultimately 
reach agreement, but the only thing a heated 
argument ever produced is coolness. This prov-
erb is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
Variant of this proverb: heated argu-
ments do not warm the fi reside.
the only thing we have to fear is fear 
itself  Negative feelings such as fear and 
doubt can do more harm than the things 
you are afraid of or uncertain about: Once 
we have grasped the notion that the only thing 
we have to fear is fear itself, we can face the 
future with renewed courage, confi dence, and 
optimism. The proverb is associated with 
President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who 
used it in his fi rst inaugural address in 
1933, but it is probably of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: we have 
nothing to fear but fear itself.
one wedding brings another
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   216 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
217
only time will tell  See time will tell.
open confession is good for the soul 
See confession is good for the soul.
an open door may tempt a saint  It is 
best not to put temptation in anybody’s 
way—even the most honest and upright 
person might fi nd it hard to resist: She 
had never stolen a cent in her life before, but 
the sight of all that money lying there was 
too much for her—an open door may tempt 
a saint. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1659 in James Howell’s Spanish Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opportunity makes a thief.
the opera ain’t over till the fat lady 
sings  Wait until something fi nally 
comes to an end before you give up 
hope, celebrate your success, abandon 
your efforts, or make a judgment: “One 
day three years ago, Ralph Carpenter, 
who was then Texas Tech’s sports infor-
mation director, declared to the press 
box contingent in Austin, ‘The rodeo 
ain’t over till the bull riders ride.’ Stirred 
to top that deep insight, San Antonio 
sports editor Dan Cook countered with, 
‘The opera ain’t over till the fat lady 
sings’” (Washington Post, 1978). Current 
from at least the 1970s, the proverb has 
a possible origin in the southern U.S. 
saying, “Church ain’t out till the fat lady 
sings.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s not over till it’s over.
opportunities look for you when you are 
worth fi nding  Those who have good 
fortune are often those who best deserve 
it: Don’t just sit around complaining that you 
never get the breaks—people succeed on their 
own merits, not by luck, and opportunities look 
for you when you are worth fi nding. The prov-
erb is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opportunity never knocks for persons 
not worth a rap.
opportunity knocks but once  Take 
advantage of opportunities when they 
arise, because you may not get a second 
chance: “‘Opportunity only knocks once 
in this world,’ he would say. Major Major’s 
father repeated this good joke at every 
opportunity” (Joseph Heller, Catch-22, 
1961). The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in 1567. Early 
examples of its use had fortune or fate in 
place of opportunity.
Variant of this proverb: opportunity 
never knocks twice at any man’s door.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that will not when he may, when 
he will he may have nay.
opportunity makes a thief  Do not leave 
valuable things unsecured in a place where 
they could easily be stolen: Opportunity 
makes a thief, and people who park their car 
on the street and leave the keys in the ignition 
should not be too surprised to fi nd it gone when 
they return. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in this form in 1387, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the hole calls the thief; an open 
door may tempt a saint.
opportunity never knocks for persons 
not worth a rap  Worthless people are 
unlikely to enjoy good fortune: She could 
have made something of herself if she had tried, 
but she was too idle and feckless to bother, and 
 opportunity never knocks for persons not worth a rap
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   217 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
218
opportunity never knocks for persons not worth 
a rap.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opportunities look for you when you 
are worth finding.
opportunity never knocks twice at any 
man’s door  See opportunity knocks 
but once.
opposites attract  People who have 
nothing in common are often drawn 
together because they have qualities that 
complement each other: They say that 
opposites attract, but a lasting friendship is 
more likely to be built on similarity than on 
difference. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1918 in J. Watson and A. J. Rees’s Mys-
tery of the Downs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
extremes meet.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: like attracts like.
the optimist’s cup is half full; the pessi-
mist’s cup is half empty  See the glass is 
either half empty or half full.
other times, other manners  Customs 
and conventions change over the years, 
and we should not judge people or things 
of the past by modern standards, or vice 
versa; sometimes said to those who mock 
or criticize the behavior of members of 
a different generation: “Notwithstanding 
the favourite explanation of ‘other times, 
other manners,’ contemporary critics of 
Clarissa found very much the same fault 
with her history as people do to-day” 
(Austin Dobson, Samuel Richardson, 1902). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in 1576, in the form “Other times, other 
ways,” but the sentiment it expresses is of 
ancient origin. It also occurs in the French 
form “Autres temps, autres moeurs.”
Variant of this proverb: other times, 
other customs.
an ounce of common sense is worth a 
pound of theory  A practical common-
sense approach is often far more effective 
than abstract theorizing: Ms. Jackson and 
her helpers believe that an ounce of common 
sense is worth a pound of theory, and have 
worked wonders with some of the problem cases 
that the so-called experts gave up on long ago.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never let your education interfere 
with your intelligence.
an ounce of discretion is worth a pound 
of wit  Good judgment is often more 
valuable than knowledge or learning; also 
interpreted more literally as a warning 
to tactfully refrain from making jokes at 
another’s expense: At times like this it is 
wise to err on the side of caution, whatever 
the textbooks say—remember that an ounce of 
discretion is worth a pound of wit. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1616 (T. Adams, 
Sacrifi ce of Thankfulness), with learning in 
place of wit.
an ounce of practice is worth a pound 
of precept  The best way to teach is 
by example, and the best way to learn 
is by experience: “Remember that rigid 
probity, and the strictest punctuality . . . 
are the very soul of business, and that 
an ounce of practice is worth a pound 
of precept” (R. D. Blackmore, Cradock 
Nowell, 1866).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: experience is the best teacher; an 
ounce of practice is worth a pound of 
precept; years know more than books.
opportunity never knocks twice at any man’s door
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   218 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
219
an ounce of prevention is worth a 
pound of cure  It often takes a lot of 
effort to put right something that could 
have been prevented with a little effort: 
“An ounce of prevention is worth a 
pound of cure. . . . All the old saws point 
up the value of heading off a problem 
before it reaches the pass” (Washington 
Times, 1997).
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
a stitch in time saves nine; prevention is 
better than cure; who repairs not his 
gutters repairs his whole house.
out of debt, out of danger  Nobody 
who owes money can feel safe and secure: 
I breathed a sigh of relief as I handed over the 
wad of bills—out of debt, out of danger. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a man in debt is caught in a net.
out of sight, out of mind  We tend to 
forget about people or things we have 
not seen for some time: “He did not 
actually suggest that she should come 
home. Evidently it was still necessary 
that she should remain out of sight and 
out of mind—a skeleton in a distant and 
well-locked cupboard” (George Orwell, A 
Clergyman’s Daughter, 1935). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1450, but the senti-
ment it expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
seldom seen, soon forgotten.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
absence makes the heart grow fonder.
out of the fullness of the heart the 
mouth speaks  People cannot avoid talk-
ing about what is on their mind; also used 
to imply that a person’s true thoughts and 
feelings are revealed by what he or she 
says: Out of the fullness of the heart the mouth 
speaks, and she was so angry and upset that 
she could restrain herself no longer. The prov-
erb is of biblical origin: “O generation 
of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak 
good things? for out of the abundance of 
the heart the mouth speaketh” (Matthew 
12:34).
Variant of this proverb: out of 
the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaks.
out of the mouths of babes and suck-
lings come great truths  Children often 
make surprisingly pertinent remarks or 
profound observations by accident: I asked 
Megan if she knew what divorce was, and she 
said, “It’s when your dad doesn’t live with you 
any more but buys you better birthday presents.” 
Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings! 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Out of 
the mouth of babes and sucklings hath 
thou ordained strength” (Psalm 8:2), “Yea; 
have ye never read, Out of the mouth of 
babes and sucklings thou hast perfected 
praise?” (Matthew 21:16). It is often used 
in a shortened and allusive form, as in the 
example.
Variant of this proverb: from the 
mouths of babes come words of wisdom.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
children and fools speak the truth.
 out of the mouths of babes and sucklings come great truths