220
paddle your own canoe  Make your own 
way; rely upon your own resources: He 
decided to go freelance and paddle his own 
canoe. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1844, in Captain Frederick Marryat’s Set-
tlers in Canada, but became better known 
through a poem by Sarah Bolton, pub-
lished in Harper’s Magazine in May 1854: 
“Voyage upon life’s sea,/To yourself be 
true,/And, whatever your lot may be,/
Paddle your own canoe.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every man is the architect of his 
own fortune; if you want a thing 
done well, do it yourself; god helps 
those who help themselves; life is 
what you make it.
paper bleeds little  It is easy to do some-
thing in writing, without taking account of 
the human factors involved: The conditions 
seemed reasonable and harmless enough on 
paper, but paper bleeds little, and nobody could 
have predicted how much suffering they would 
cause. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1940, in Ernest Hemingway’s novel For 
Whom the Bell Tolls, but with the implica-
tion that it was already in general use.
paper does not blush  It is possible to 
express in writing what you would be too 
ashamed or embarrassed to say: I can’t 
tell him face to face—I’ll send him a letter. 
Paper does not blush. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1577 in John Grange’s The 
Golden Aphroditis.
parents are patterns  Parents are role 
models for their children and should set a 
good example: Parents are patterns, and with 
their father in prison and their mother funding 
her drug habit with prostitution, these children 
have little chance of remaining on the straight 
and narrow. This proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
parsley seed goes nine times to the 
devil  Parsley is a diffi cult plant to grow, 
and the seeds take such a long time to 
germinate that it seems they have been 
down to hell several times before they 
sprout: They say that parsley seed goes nine 
times to the devil, and in my experience some 
of it never comes back—I sowed a whole packet 
in that bed, and all I got was a few scrawny 
plants. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1658, but with the implication that it was 
already in regional use in England.
past cure, past care  It is futile worry-
ing about something when it is too late 
to do anything about it. The proverb was 
recorded in the works of Robert Greene 
in 1593: “Remember the old proverbe, 
p
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   220 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
221
past cure, past care.” In 1594 William 
Shakespeare quoted the proverb in his 
play Love’s Labour’s Lost (5:2): “Great rea-
son; for ‘past cure is still past care.’”
the path of true love never runs 
smooth  See the course of true love 
never did run smooth.
patience is a remedy for every sor-
row  In time grief will fade, ills will be 
cured, and problems will be solved, so 
all you can do is wait patiently: Patience is 
a remedy for every sorrow, and in six months’ 
time you’ll probably have forgotten all about 
it. The proverb was fi rst recorded, with 
different wording, c. 1390. In modern 
usage the word sorrow may be replaced by 
disease or trouble.
Variant of this proverb: patience is a 
plaster for all sores.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
time is a great healer.
patience is a virtue  It is good to be 
patient, but it is not easy: “patience is a 
virtue; and . . . you ought not to be in 
haste to take a fi rst offer, for fear you 
should not have a second” (Samuel Rich-
ardson, Sir Charles Grandison, 1754). First 
recorded in English in the 14th century, 
the proverb is of ancient origin.
Variants of this proverb: patience is 
a virtue, catch it if you can: seldom in a 
woman and never in a man; patience is a 
virtue which few possess—some have a 
little, others have less.
patriotism is the last refuge of a scoun-
drel  Those who have no better argument 
resort to appeals to patriotic sentiment: 
The meeting split into those who believed it was 
right to fi ght to defend national interests and 
those who believed that such patriotism was the 
last refuge of scoundrels. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded as a quotation of Samuel Johnson 
in James Boswell’s Life of Johnson (1791).
pay as you go and nothing you’ll owe  It 
is best to pay for everything when you 
receive it and not to get into debt: In these 
days of credit cards and charge accounts, the 
saying “Pay as you go and nothing you’ll owe” 
has a rather old-fashioned ring. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1851 Polly Peablos-
som’s Wedding (T. A. Burke, ed.).
pay beforehand was never well 
served  People who are paid in advance 
for their services have little incentive to 
work hard or well: Take my advice and don’t 
hand over any money until the job is at least 
half done—pay beforehand was never well 
served. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1591 in the form “He that pays aforehand 
has never his work well done.”
pay what you owe and you’ll know what 
you own  Once you have paid in full for 
something, there can be no dispute about 
who owns it; also used with reference to 
the seizure of a debtor’s property: “Pay 
what you owe and you’ll know what you own,” 
they say, so I guess the house and car aren’t 
mine yet. The proverb is fi rst recorded 
in J. Stevens’s A New Spanish and English 
Dictionary (1706).
peace makes plenty  Peace brings 
prosperity: “Peace, Dear nurse of arts, 
plenties, and joyful births” (William 
Shakespeare, Henry V, 5:2). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in Reliquae Antiquae in 
the 15th century.
Variants of this proverb: peace 
maketh plenty; plenty maketh pride; 
 peace makes plenty
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   221 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
222
pride maketh war; war maketh poverty; 
poverty maketh peace.
the pen is mightier than the sword 
Writing can be more effective or per-
suasive than violence or aggression; also 
used to imply that words can be more 
dangerous than weapons: “Beneath the 
rule of men entirely great/The pen 
is mightier than the sword” (Edward 
George Bulwer-Lytton, Richelieu, 1838). 
The quotation is the fi rst recorded use 
of the proverb in its current form, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a goose quill is more dangerous than 
a lion’s claw.
a penny saved is a penny earned  It is 
wise to save money whenever you can, 
however small the amount: This brand is 
not much cheaper, but a penny saved is a penny 
earned. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1640 in the form “A penny spar’d is twice 
got,” and the word got was used in place 
of earned in subsequent occurrences of the 
proverb up to the early 20th century.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: saving is getting; thrift is a great 
revenue.
penny wise and pound foolish  By being 
too thrifty or frugal with small expenses 
you may incur a much larger expense; 
also used of those who combine parsi-
mony with extravagance: “The problem in 
any police agency is that training assumes 
lower priority than putting people out on 
the street. In a lot of ways that’s penny 
wise and pound foolish” (New York Times, 
1987). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1607, in Edward Topsell’s History of 
Four-footed Beasts: “If by couetousnesse 
or negligence, one withdraw from them 
their ordinary foode, he shall be penny 
wise, and pound foolish.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
spare at the spigot, and let out the 
bunghole.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: take care of the pence and the 
pounds will take care of themselves.
people are more easily led than driven 
It is better to guide people by example 
than to force them to do as they are told: 
You may fi nd that a change of approach will 
work wonders—people are more easily led than 
driven, and nobody responds well to threats and 
coercion. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1690 in Winthrop Papers.
people who live in glass houses shouldn’t 
throw stones  Do not criticize others 
if you have the same faults yourself and 
are therefore vulnerable to retaliation: 
“Granted, the present internal chaos and 
confusion of the Anglican churches in the 
Northern hemisphere forbids me to make 
merry at Rome’s expense; people who live 
in glass houses should not throw stones; yet 
there is a difference here. The trouble with 
Western Anglicanism is that it has drifted 
from its Reformation roots in matters of 
mental method, and needs to return to 
those roots” (James I. Packer, “Assessing 
the Anglican-Roman Catholic Divide: An 
Anglican Perspective,” CRUX, 1997). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1640, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin: 
Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde (c. 1385) 
contains a similar warning for “Who that 
hath an hed of verre [a head of glass].” A 
facetious variant is “People who live in glass 
houses should undress in the dark.”
the pen is mightier than the sword
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   222 1/29/07   5:12:55 PM
223
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
judge not, that ye be not judged.
physician, heal thyself  Do not reproach 
another person for something that you 
are equally guilty of; also used to imply 
that you should solve your own problems 
before you try to deal with those of 
other people: “How can a man . . . teach 
sobriety or cleanliness, if he be himself 
drunken or foul? ‘Physician, heal thyself,’ 
is the answer of his neighbours” (Samuel 
Smiles, Thrift, 1875). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Ye will surely say unto 
me this proverb, Physician, heal thy-
self: whatsoever we have heard done in 
Capernaum, do also here in thy country” 
(Luke 4:23).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
sweep your own doorstep clean.
a picture is worth a thousand words  See 
one picture is worth ten thousand 
words.
pigs are pigs  All bad people or things 
are equally undesirable, regardless of 
where they come from: Pigs are pigs, and 
this kind of behavior is no more acceptable in a 
college graduate than it is in an ignorant lout. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1822, 
in a letter from Charles Lamb to Samuel 
Taylor Coleridge.
pigs may fl y, but they are very unlikely 
birds  See if a pig had wings, it might 
fly.
piss or get off the pot  If you’re not 
ready to take action or get on with what 
you have to do, then make way for some-
body who is: This is not the time for hesita-
tion or indecision—piss or get off the pot!
Variant of this proverb: shit or get 
off the pot.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
fish or cut bait.
the pitcher will go to the well once 
too often  Nothing can continue or be 
repeated indefi nitely—a run of good for-
tune or success must come to an end, per-
sistent cheats or swindlers will ultimately 
be caught out: I decided not to push my 
luck by asking for yet another extension to the 
deadline—my publisher had accepted all the 
excuses I’d given so far, but the pitcher will go 
to the well once too often. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1340.
Variant of this proverb: a pitcher 
that goes to the well too often is broken 
at last.
pity is akin to love  Pity and love are 
related emotions: She pitied him, and 
although pity is akin to love, it is not the best 
foundation for a lasting relationship. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1696, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin, occurring in Shakespeare’s play 
Twelfth Night (3:1): “I pity you.—That’s a 
degree to love.”
a place for everything and everything 
in its place  Everything belongs some-
where, and should be tidied away; often 
used to encourage orderliness or to describe 
an orderly place: “‘I thought you were 
rather partial to anatomical specimens.’ ‘So I 
am, but not on the breakfast-table.’ ‘A place 
for everything and everything in its place,’ 
as my grandmother used to say.” (Dorothy 
L. Sayers, Lord Peter Views Body, 1928). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1640, with 
different wording, and occurs in guides 
to thrift and household  management, 
 a place for everything and everything in its place
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   223 1/29/07   5:12:55 PM
224
 notably that written by Mrs. Isabella Bee-
ton (1836–65).
please your eye and plague your 
heart  Those who choose their husbands, 
wives, or lovers on the basis of good looks 
alone may suffer for their choice: “‘Please 
your eye and plague your heart’ is an 
adage that want of beauty invented, I dare 
say, more than a thousand years ago” (Wil-
liam Cobbett, Advice to Young Men, 1829). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1617.
pleasure fi rst and business after  See 
business before pleasure.
plus ça change, plus c’est la même 
chose  See the more things change, 
the more they stay the same.
poets are born, not made  The ability to 
write poetry is an innate quality and cannot 
be taught or learned: She rejected the notion 
that poets are born, not made, and believed that 
everybody was capable of putting his or her 
thoughts into verse, with or without tuition. 
The proverb is of ancient origin in its Latin 
form, “Poeta nascitur, non fi t.” It is sometimes 
applied to different skills or occupations by 
substituting another word for poets, as in 
“Salesmen are born, not made.”
politeness costs nothing and gains every-
thing  See civility costs nothing.
politics makes strange bedfellows  Pol-
itics tends to bring together those who 
would normally avoid each other’s com-
pany, and unlikely alliances may be forged 
for political reasons: “For, if anything, 
Troy represented the earthy patriotism of 
New York’s hard-hat voters, a fact which, 
according to Mankiewicz, ‘made him a 
special hero to us.’ Politics do indeed 
make strange bedfellows” (Victor Lasky, 
It Didn’t Start with Watergate, 1977). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1839 in 
Diary of Philip Hone. The expression strange 
bedfellows derives from Shakespeare’s Tem-
pest (2:2; 1611): “Misery acquaints a man 
with strange bedfellows.”
a poor excuse is better than none  See a 
bad excuse is better than none.
possession is nine points of the law  A 
person who actually has something in his 
or her possession is in a strong position 
for claiming legal ownership of or entitle-
ment to it: “It is hard to reconcile this 
with Russia’s dreadful example of looting 
masses of art, hiding it and then claiming 
that possession is 90 percent of the law” 
(New York Times, 1994). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1616 (T. Draxe, Adages). 
The nine in the proverb is nine out of ten 
parts. The “nine points” have been listed as 
(1) a good deal of money, (2) a good deal 
of patience, (3) a good case, (4) a good 
lawyer, (5) a good counsel, (6) good wit-
nesses, (7) a good jury, (8) a good judge, 
and (9) good luck.
Variant of this proverb: possession is 
nine-tenths of the law.
a postern door makes a thief  It is all too 
easy to rob a house that has a rear entrance 
through which people can slip in and out 
unnoticed: They had fi tted extra locks and bolts 
on the back door, on the basis of the saying “A pos-
tern door makes a thief,” but unfortunately they 
had neglected to secure the windows. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded c. 1450 in the form 
“A back door makes a rich man poor.”
Variant of this proverb: the back 
door robs the house.
please your eye and plague your heart
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   224 1/29/07   5:12:55 PM
225
the post of honor is the post of danger 
The most perilous positions in an admin-
istration or organization are those that 
have the highest prestige: She had no ambi-
tions to rise any further through the ranks, on 
the basis that the post of honor is the post of 
danger. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1832 in A. Henderson’s Scot-
tish Proverbs but the sentiment it expresses 
is of much earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the highest branch is not the saf-
est roost; uneasy lies the head that 
wears a crown.
the pot calls the kettle black  People 
criticize others for faults that they have 
themselves, or make accusations that are 
equally applicable to themselves: “But a very 
few weeks after Voltaire’s arrival, little clouds 
of discord become visible on the horizon; 
and one can overhear the pot and the kettle . 
. . calling each other black” (Lytton Strachey, 
Biographical Essays, “Voltaire and Frederick 
the Great,” 1949). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1699, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin. 
It alludes to the blackened bottoms of pots, 
pans, and kettles used on an open fi re.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the best place for criticism is in 
front of your mirror.
poverty comes from God, but not 
dirt  Some people cannot avoid being 
poor, but nobody has any excuse for being 
dirty or for failing to keep his or her 
house clean: “Poverty comes from God, but not 
dirt,” my aunt used to say as she scrubbed the 
fl oor on her hands and knees.
poverty is no crime  See poverty is not 
a crime.
poverty is no disgrace, but it’s a great 
inconvenience  Poor people have noth-
ing to be ashamed of, but their situation 
is nonetheless undesirable: “‘Poverty’s no 
disgrace, but ’tis a great inconvenience’ 
was a common saying among the Lark Rise 
people; but . . . their poverty was no less 
than a hampering drag upon them” (Flora 
Thompson, Lark Rise to Candleford, 1945). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1591 in 
the form “Poverty is no vice, though it be 
an inconvenience.”
poverty is not a crime  Poor people 
should not be treated like criminals: “It 
is easy enough to say that poverty is no 
crime. No; if it were men wouldn’t be 
ashamed of it” (Jerome K. Jerome, Idle 
Thoughts of an Idle Fellow, 1889). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1591 in the form 
“Poverty is no vice.”
Variants of this proverb: poverty is 
no crime; poverty is no sin.
poverty makes strange bedfellows  See 
adversity makes strange bedfellows.
power corrupts, and absolute power cor-
rupts absolutely  Power has an adverse 
effect on the integrity of those in authority, 
and the more power they have, the worse 
they become: His impeccable record suggested 
that he would be a just and wise ruler, but power 
corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely, 
and the people lived to regret their choice. The 
proverb comes from a letter written by 
the En glish historian Lord Acton in 1887: 
“Power tends to corrupt, and absolute 
power corrupts absolutely. Great men are 
almost always bad men, even when they 
exercise infl uence and not authority.” The 
sentiment expressed in the shorter form, 
“Power corrupts,” is of earlier origin.
 power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   225 1/29/07   5:12:55 PM
226
practice makes perfect  The more often 
you do something, the better at it you 
become: “Young birds very frequently make 
their fi rst fl ight when their parents are out 
of sight. Practice of course makes perfect 
and puts a polish on the somewhat awkward 
fi rst performance; but there is no elaborate 
learning needed” (J. S. Huxley, Man in the 
Modern World, “The Intelligence of Birds,” 
1947). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1553 in T. Wilson’s Art of Rhetoric.
practice what you preach  Always fol-
low the advice or instructions you give 
to others: Practice what you preach—it’s no 
use warning your children about the dangers 
of alcohol unless you are prepared to modify 
your own drinking habits. The proverb is of 
ancient origin.
praise no man till he is dead  Final judg-
ments on a person’s qualities can only 
become reliable after he or she is dead: 
The revelation that their former boss had been 
swindling the corporation’s pension fund made 
several employees wish they had observed the 
old proverb that warns against praising any 
man till he is dead. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in R. Taverner, Proverbs or Adages 
with New Additions, gathered out of the Chili-
ades of Erasmus (1540).
Variant of this proverb: praise day 
at night.
praise the bridge that carries you 
over  Do not criticize people or things 
that have helped you: On the principle that 
you should always praise the bridge that carries 
you over, I spoke out in defense of the system 
that had enabled me to continue my education 
after the death of my parents. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1678 in John Ray’s 
A Collection of English Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: everybody 
speaks well of the bridge that carries him 
over.
praise the child, and you make love to the 
mother  Parents—especially mothers—
are pleased and fl attered by compliments 
paid to their children: He struggled to think 
of something nice to say about her obnoxious 
son, anxious to win her favor and well aware 
that if you praise the child you make love to 
the mother. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1829 (W. Cobbett, Advice to Young Men), 
but with the implication that it had long 
been in general use.
a preacher’s son is often bad  See cler-
gymen’s sons always turn out badly.
prejudice is being down on what we are 
not up on  People automatically dislike 
or distrust anything they have no under-
standing of or familiarity with: Disparaging 
and offensive remarks like these are just a sign 
of ignorance—prejudice is being down on what 
we are not up on.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
prejudice is the child of ignorance.
prejudice is the child of ignorance  Prej-
udice is caused by a lack of knowledge or 
understanding: On the basis that prejudice is 
the child of ignorance, it is hoped that this new 
information campaign will pave the way for 
better race relations. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in William Hazlitt’s essay “On 
Prejudice” (c. 1821).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
prejudice is being down on what we are 
not up on.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: admiration is the daughter of 
ignorance.
practice makes perfect
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   226 1/29/07   5:12:55 PM
227
prevention is better than cure  It is 
better to prevent something undesir-
able from happening than to have to 
fi x it afterward: The debate was evenly 
divided between those who favored abortion 
on demand and those who felt that free con-
traception should be available to all, on the 
basis that prevention is better than cure. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1618, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: an ounce of prevention is worth 
a pound of cure; a stitch in time saves 
nine; who repairs not his gutters 
repairs his whole house.
the price of liberty is eternal vigi-
lance  Freedom can only be preserved 
by keeping a watch on any threat to it: 
The Treasury might wrangle over the cost 
of the nation’s defense, but the price of lib-
erty is eternal vigilance. An Irish proverb 
fi rst recorded by John Philpot Curran in 
1790, it became a favorite maxim of U.S. 
reformer Wendell Phillips in the mid-
19th century.
pride comes before a fall  See pride 
goes before a fall.
pride feels no pain  People are able to 
endure or ignore the physical discomfort 
caused by smart or fashionable clothes, 
shoes, or jewelry; also used in other 
situations where people tolerate physical 
suffering in order not to lose face: In those 
days women wore corsets that were sometimes 
so tightly laced as to cause internal injury, but 
pride feels no pain. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1614.
Variant of this proverb: pride feels 
no cold.
pride goes before a fall  Arrogance and 
overconfi dence often lead to humiliation 
or disaster; often used as a warning: “‘I 
suppose he thinks he’d be mayor himself,’ 
said the people of Blackstable. They pursed 
their lips. ‘Pride goeth before a fall’” (W. 
Somerset Maugham, Cakes and Ale, 1930). 
The proverb is of biblical origin—“Pride 
goeth before destruction, and an haughty 
spirit before a fall” (Proverbs 16:18)—and 
is sometimes regarded as a misquotation. 
The sentiment it expresses occurs in one 
of the fables of Aesop (sixth century b.c.), 
about a victorious fi ghting cock who fl ies 
up to a high place and crows in triumph, 
only to be carried off by a passing eagle.
Variant of this proverb: pride comes 
before a fall.
procrastination is the thief of time  If 
you constantly put off doing things, you 
will only waste the time in which they 
could have been done and will ultimately 
run out of time in which to do them: 
“They were virtuous young men, and 
lost no opportunity that fell in their way 
to make their livelihood. Their motto 
was in these words, namely, ‘Procrastina-
tion is the thief of time’” (Mark Twain, 
The Innocents Abroad, 1869). The proverb 
comes from Edward Young’s poem Night 
Thoughts (1742): “Procrastination is the 
thief of time;/Year after year it steals, till 
all are fl ed.” Other writers have different 
views on the subject: Oscar Wilde wrote, 
in The Picture of Dorian Gray (1891), “He 
was always late on principle, this principle 
being that punctuality is the thief of time,” 
and according to Ogden Nash, in The Prim-
rose Path (1935), “Far from being the thief 
of Time, procrastination is the king of it.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: never put off until tomorrow 
 procrastination is the thief of time
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   227 1/29/07   5:12:56 PM
228
what you can do today; there’s no 
time like the present.
promises, like piecrust, are made to be 
broken  People cannot be depended 
upon to keep their word: She promised never 
to mention the incident again, but promises, like 
piecrust, are made to be broken, and she couldn’t 
resist retelling the story—much to my embar-
rassment—at a dinner party the following week. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1681, in 
the periodical Heraclitus Ridens: “He makes 
no more of breaking Acts of Parliaments, 
than if they were like Promises and Pie-
crust made to be broken.”
Variant of this proverb: promises are 
like piecrust: easy made and easy broken.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: a man’s word is as good as his 
bond.
the proof of the pudding is in the eating 
Nothing can be properly judged until it is 
put to the test: The car is very attractive in 
its new design, and the improved performance 
fi gures look good on paper, but the proof of the 
pudding is in the eating—let’s go for a drive. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in the 17th century, but the senti-
ment it expresses is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: the proof is 
in the pudding.
a prophet is not without honor, save 
in his own country  People who give 
words of warning or wisdom are not 
heeded or appreciated by those closest 
to them: “In Florence the signori thought 
him an amusing fellow and his letters 
often made them laugh, but they had 
no great confi dence in his judgment and 
never followed his advice. ‘A prophet is 
not without honor save in his own coun-
try,’ he sighed” (W. Somerset Maugham, 
Then and Now, 1946). The proverb is of 
biblical origin in its current form: “A 
prophet is not without honor, save in his 
own country, and in his own house” (Mat-
thew 13:57).
Variant of this proverb: a prophet is 
without honor in his own country.
prosperity discovers vice; adversity, 
virtue  Wealth or good fortune often 
brings out the worst in a person, whereas 
hardship or misfortune brings out the 
best: The saying “Prosperity discovers vice; 
adversity, virtue” should not be used as an 
argument for withholding fi nancial assistance 
from the needy. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1732 in Thomas Fuller’s Gno-
mologia: Adagies and Proverbs.
prosperity is just around the corner 
Things will improve in the near future: 
Politicians are always telling us that prosperity 
is just around the corner—provided that we 
continue voting them into power—but over the 
past few years we seem to have done a complete 
tour of the block without tracking it down. The 
proverb originated at the time of the Great 
Depression, during the administration of 
President Herbert Hoover (1929–33), 
with whom it is generally associated.
providence is always on the side of the 
big battalions  Those with the great-
est strength, power, or infl uence always 
seem to have luck on their side and 
inevitably win the day: Not only do they 
outnumber us, but they also have better weap-
ons at their disposal. Providence is always 
on the side of the big battalions, and I see 
no point in fi ghting a battle that we can-
not possibly win. The proverb has been 
attributed to various people, notably 
promises, like piecrust, are made to be broken
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   228 1/29/07   5:12:56 PM
229
the French marshal Henri de Turenne 
(1611–75): “la fortune est toujours, comme 
disait le pauvre M. de Turenne, pour les gros 
bataillons [fortune is always, as poor 
Mr. de Turenne used to say, for the big 
battalions]” (Madame de Sévigné, letter 
dated December 22, 1673). The French 
writer Voltaire (1694–78) was of a dif-
ferent opinion: “Dieu n’est pas pour les 
gros bataillons, mais pour ceux qui tirent le 
mieux [God is on the side not of the big 
battalions, but of the best shots].”
Variant of this proverb: God is always 
on the side of the big battalions.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: might makes right; the weakest go 
to the wall.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the race is not to the swift, nor 
the battle to the strong.
punctuality is the politeness of kings  It 
is discourteous to be late, regardless of 
your rank or status: “Punctuality is the 
politeness of kings, and King Magnus is a 
model in that respect” (George Bernard 
Shaw, The Apple Cart, 1929). The proverb 
is attributed to King Louis XVIII (1755–
1824) in its French form “L’exactitude est 
la politesse des rois.” It was fi rst recorded in 
English in 1853, in the form “Punctuality 
is the virtue of princes.”
Variant of this proverb: punctuality 
is the politeness of princes.
punctuality is the soul of business  It 
is important to be on time for business 
appointments: Punctuality is the soul of busi-
ness, and most companies take a very dim view of 
job applicants who arrive late for their interviews. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1853 in T. 
C. Haliburton’s Sam Slick’s Wise Saws.
put fi rst things fi rst  See first things 
first.
put your best foot forward  Always 
make the most of your strengths and 
abilities; also used to urge people to make 
their best effort or be on their best behav-
ior: Put your best foot forward, and try to make 
a good impression at the outset. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in the 16th century. It 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play Titus Androni-
cus (2:3), “Come on, my lords, the better 
foot before.”
put your trust in God, and keep your 
powder dry  Do not pin all your hopes on 
divine assistance or intervention—always 
be prepared to take action yourself if neces-
sary: “Zwingli . . . believed in the necessity 
of war; while Luther put his sole trust in 
the Word of God. . . . Zwingli was a free 
republican; while Luther was a loyal monar-
chist. He belonged to the Cromwellian type 
of men who “trust in God and keep their 
powder dry” (Philip Schaff, History of the 
Christian Church, 1883–1893). The proverb 
is attributed to the English Civil War leader 
Oliver Cromwell (1599–1658), who is said 
to have given this advice to his troops at the 
battle of Edgehill in 1642. The word powder 
refers to gunpowder. The proverb has given 
rise to the cliché to keep one’s powder dry.
Variant of this proverb: trust in God 
and keep your powder dry.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
hope for the best and prepare for the 
worst.
 put your trust in God, and keep your powder dry