231
the race is not to the swift, nor the 
battle to the strong  Speed and power 
do not guarantee success—those who are 
slower and weaker may win through per-
severance or tactics: “Amongst the wild 
tribes of the Malay Archipelago there is 
also a racing match; and it appears from 
M. Bourien’s account, as Sir J. Lubbock 
remarks, that ‘the race, “is not to the 
swift, nor the battle to the strong,” but to 
the young man who has the good fortune 
to please his intended bride’” (Charles 
Darwin, The Descent of Man, 1871). The 
proverb is of biblical origin: “the race 
is not to the swift, nor the battle to the 
strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor 
yet riches to men of understanding, nor 
yet favor to men of skill; but time and 
chance happeneth to them all” (Ecclesi-
astes 9:11).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
slow and steady wins the race.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: providence is always on the side of 
the big battalions; the weakest go to 
the wall.
rain before seven, fi ne before eleven 
Rain early in the morning often heralds 
a fi ne day; occasionally applied to other 
things that start in an unpromising way: 
The weather forecast was not good, but my 
hopes were raised when I woke at dawn to the 
sound of rain beating on the window. Rain 
before seven, fi ne before eleven—perhaps the 
baseball game would not have to be canceled 
after all. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1835, but with the implication that it was 
already in use among amateur weather 
forecasters.
Variant of this proverb: rain before 
seven, clear before eleven.
rats desert a sinking ship  People tend 
to leave an organization, pull out of a 
project, or abandon a cause when they 
become aware that it is heading for disas-
ter; often used to imply disloyalty, or to 
predict the imminent failure of some-
thing: “What do you want HER to know 
how you are for? She don’t want to see 
’ee. She’s the rat that forsook the sinking 
ship! . . . And I stuck to un—the more 
fool I! Have that strumpet in the house 
indeed!” (Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure, 
1895). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in the 16th century, but a similar senti-
ment—referring to the notion that rats 
and mice always leave a house that is 
about to fall down—was expressed in the 
fi rst century a.d. by the Roman scholar 
Pliny the Elder.
Variant of this proverb: rats abandon 
a sinking ship.
r
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   231 1/29/07   5:12:56 PM
232
the receiver is as bad as the thief  See 
if there were no receivers, there 
would be no thieves.
red sky at night, sailor’s delight; red sky 
in the morning, sailors take warning  A 
red sky at sunset is a sign of fair weather 
the following day, but a red sky at sunrise 
means that bad weather is on the way: A 
spectacular sunset on Saturday evening was 
followed by a glorious day for our outing on 
Sunday, fulfi lling the promise of the old saying 
“Red sky at night, sailor’s delight; red sky in the 
morning, sailors take warning.” The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “When it is evening, 
ye say, It will be fair weather: for the sky 
is red. And in the morning, It will be foul 
weather to day: for the sky is red and 
lowring” (Matthew 16:2–3).
Variant of this proverb: red sky at 
night, shepherd’s delight; red sky in the 
morning, shepherd’s warning.
a reed before the wind lives on, while 
mighty oaks do fall  Those who are fl ex-
ible and relatively insignifi cant can survive 
crises that bring down more prominent 
people who are unable or unwilling to 
yield or adapt: Remembering the saying “A 
reed before the wind lives on while mighty 
oaks do fall,” he managed to hold on to his job 
through successive administrations by keeping a 
low profi le and adjusting his method of work-
ing in line with policy changes and prevailing 
trends. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde (c. 1385): 
“And reed that boweth down for every 
blast,/Ful lightly, cesse wynd, it wol 
aryse;/ But so nyl nought an ook whan 
it is cast.”
the remedy may be worse than the 
disease  Action taken to put something 
right is often more unpleasant or damag-
ing than the original problem: “‘But how 
much will it cost to win the day?’ asked 
Mme. Sechard. ‘Fees if you win, one 
thousand francs if we lose our case.’ ‘Oh, 
dear!’ cried poor Eve, ‘Why, the remedy 
is worse than the disease!’” (Honoré de 
Balzac, Eve and David, 1841–43). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1582, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of ancient 
origin. It occurs in one of the fables of 
Aesop (sixth century b.c.), about a group 
of pigeons who ask a hawk to defend them 
against a kite: once inside their cote, the 
hawk kills more of them in a single day 
than the kite could have killed outside in 
a whole year.
Variant of this proverb: the cure may 
be worse than the disease.
render unto Caesar that which is Cae-
sar’s  Give what you have to give to 
those who have a better claim to them: 
He did not want to hand the extra money over 
to the taxman, but his accountant persuaded 
him to render unto Caesar what was Caesar’s. 
A biblical quotation from Matthew 22:21, 
the proverb has changed somewhat from 
its original meaning, which is evident 
from its fuller biblical form: “Then saith 
he unto them, Render therefore unto 
Caesar the things which are Caesar’s; 
and unto God the things that are God’s.” 
An underlying message here is to keep 
worldly things separate from religion.
revenge is a dish best eaten cold  Ven-
geance is often more satisfying if it is 
exacted some time after the original 
offense; said when a wrong cannot be 
immediately avenged, or used to discour-
age somebody from retaliating in the heat 
of the moment: I’ll get my own back one of 
the receiver is as bad as the thief
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   232 1/29/07   5:12:56 PM
233
these days, but I’m in no hurry—revenge is a 
dish best eaten cold. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1885.
Variant of this proverb: revenge is a 
dish best served cold.
revenge is sweet  It is very satisfying to 
retaliate or avenge a wrong: “I am the man 
from whom you ran, the man you sought 
to slay./That you may note and gaze and 
gloat, and say ‘Revenge is sweet’,/In the 
grit and grime of the river’s slime I am 
rotting at your feet” (Robert Service, Bal-
lads of a Cheechako, “The Ballad of One-
Eyed Mike,” 1909). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1566, in William Painter’s 
Palace of Pleasure: “Vengeance is sweete vnto 
him, which in place of killing his enemy, 
giueth life to a perfect frende.” In his poem 
Paradise Lost (1667), John Milton observed, 
“Revenge, at fi rst, though sweet,/Bitter 
ere long, back on itself recoils.”
revolutions are not made with rose 
water  It is not possible to bring about 
drastic changes by pleasant, easy, or 
peaceful means, or without causing dam-
age or suffering: “On either side harm 
must be done before good can accrue—
revolutions are not to be made with rose 
water” (Lord Byron, letter dated Octo-
ber 3, 1819). The quotation is the fi rst 
recorded use of the proverb in English. It 
comes from a rhetorical question posed 
by the French writer Nicolas (1741–94): 
“Voulez-vous qu’on vous fasse des révolutions à 
l’eau rose [Do you expect revolutions to be 
made with rose water].”
riches have wings  Money is soon gone. 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “For riches 
taketh her to her wings, as an eagle, and 
fl ieth into the heaven” (Proverbs 23:5).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money is round and runs away.
the rich get richer and the poor get 
poorer  Those who have money fi nd it 
easy to make more, while those who have 
none sink further into debt; often applied 
to a specifi c economic period, climate, or 
policy that favors the rich and disadvantages 
the poor: The most signifi cant result of this 
method of taxation is that the rich get richer and 
the poor get poorer. The proverb was popular-
ized in the early 20th century as a line from 
the song “Ain’t We Got Fun” (1921), by Gus 
Kahn and Raymond B. Egan, which also 
contains the facetious variant “The rich get 
rich and the poor get children.”
the rich man has his ice in the sum-
mer and the poor man gets his in the 
winter  It may seem that everybody, 
rich or poor, has an equal share of good 
fortune in life, but this is not so: “The 
rich get ice in the summer and the poor 
get it in the winter, so some people fi gure 
everyone gets an even break” (J. W. Rider, 
Jersey Tomatoes, 1986). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1921.
a rich man’s joke is always funny Wealthy 
people are surrounded by those who hope 
to win their favor by fl attery, such as, by 
laughing at all their jokes, whether they 
are funny or not: He went on to tell an 
anecdote that was in rather poor taste, but his 
host—who had invited him with a view to 
securing a lucrative sponsorship deal—laughed 
appreciatively. A rich man’s joke is always funny. 
The proverb comes from the writings of 
the poet T. E. Brown (1830–97).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
He that has a full purse never wanted a 
friend.
 a rich man’s joke is always funny
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   233 1/29/07   5:12:57 PM
234
a rising tide lifts all boats  Everybody 
benefi ts from an upward trend in a nation’s 
prosperity or quality of life: “The country 
was in a sharp economic expansion com-
ing out of ’82. This made everybody look 
smart—you know, the rising tide lifts 
all boats” (Washington Times, 1990). The 
proverb is associated with President John 
F. Kennedy, who used it in a speech in 
1963: “As they say on my own Cape Cod, 
a rising tide lifts all the boats.”
the road to hell is paved with good inten-
tions  Good intentions are of no value 
unless they are translated into action; also 
used when something done with good 
intentions has an undesirable or harmful 
effect: To those who constantly make vague 
promises of future support for our charity, I 
have only this to say: “The road to hell is 
paved with good intentions.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English in 1574, in 
the form “Hell is full of good desires,” but 
it is has been attributed to Saint Bernard 
(1091–1153).
Variants of this proverb: the streets 
of hell are paved with promises; hell is 
full of good meanings, but heaven is full 
of good works.
the robin and the wren are God’s cock 
and hen  The robin and the wren are 
special birds in the eyes of heaven: the 
robin and the wren are God’s cock and hen: the 
martin and the swallow are God’s mate and 
marrow. The proverb appears in the Poetical 
Description of Song Birds (1787). The prov-
erb refl ects the time-honored superstition 
that it is unlucky to kill a robin or a wren. 
It may also have been infl uenced by the 
ancient misapprehension that the robin 
and the wren were the male and female of 
the same species.
Robin Hood could brave all weathers but 
a thaw wind  Of all kinds of weather, 
a raw wind after frost or snow is the 
most penetrating. The proverb appears in 
W. Neville, The Life and Exploits of Robin 
Hood (1855). In Yorkshire, England, where 
the historical Robin Hood may have lived, 
a cold wind from the north or east is called 
a “Robin Hood wind.”
a rolling stone gathers no moss  People 
who spend their lives traveling or moving 
around tend to accumulate few responsi-
bilities or personal attachments: “We keep 
repeating the silly proverb that rolling 
stones gather no moss, as if moss were a 
desirable parasite” (George Bernard Shaw, 
Misalliance, Preface, 1914). The proverb is 
probably of ancient origin: in his Adagia 
(1500) the Dutch humanist Desiderius 
Erasmus quotes Latin and Greek proverbs 
translated as “A rolling stone is not cov-
ered with moss” and “A rolling stone does 
not gather seaweed.”
Rome was not built in a day  It takes 
a lot of time and effort to achieve great 
things; used to encourage patience and 
perseverance: “‘These are early days, 
Trot,’ she pursued, ‘and Rome was not 
built in a day, nor in a year. You have 
chosen . . . a very pretty and a very 
affectionate creature. It will be your duty 
. . . to estimate her (as you chose her) 
by the qualities she has, and not by the 
qualities she may not have. The latter you 
must develop in her, if you can’” (Charles 
Dickens, David Copperfi eld, 1850). First 
recorded in English in 1545, the proverb 
is of ancient origin.
a rose by any other name would smell 
as sweet  It is the intrinsic qualities of 
a rising tide lifts all boats
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   234 1/29/07   5:12:57 PM
235
people and things that matter, not what 
they are called—names have no bearing 
on character or nature: “Anne looked 
thoughtful. ‘I read in a book once that a 
rose by any other name would smell as 
sweet, but I’ve never been able to believe 
it. I don’t believe a rose WOULD be as 
nice if it was called a thistle or a skunk 
cabbage’” (Lucy Maud Montgomery, Anne 
of Green Gables, 1908). The proverb comes 
from Shakespeare’s play Romeo and Juliet 
(2:2), “What’s in a name? that which we 
call a rose/By any other name would 
smell as sweet.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what’s in a name?
a rose is a rose is a rose is a rose  Things 
and people are what they are—you cannot 
defi ne them in any other way, or change 
their essential nature by giving them a 
different name: “A rose is a rose is a rose,” 
said Jerome M. Becker . . . ‘He commit-
ted the murder under the infl uence of 
236
cocaine and to me that’s simple: It’s mur-
der and his conduct was depraved’” (New 
York Times, 1989). The proverb comes from 
the U.S. writer Gertrude Stein’s Sacred 
Emily (1913).
the rotten apple spoils the barrel  A 
single bad individual can have a cor-
rupting infl uence on all those around 
him or her, or everybody with whom he 
or she comes into contact; also used to 
imply that one bad member of a group 
can create an unfavorable impression of 
the whole: If we wish to retain our politi-
cal neutrality, we must keep militants and 
activists out of the organization—the rotten 
apple spoils the barrel. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
in 1340.
Variants of this proverb: the rotten 
apple injures its neighbor; one bad apple 
spoils the lot.
rules are made to be broken  People 
would not bother to make rules if they 
did not expect them to be broken every 
now and then; often used to justify some 
minor infringement, especially of a rule 
considered to be petty, unnecessary, or 
inappropriate: I know we’re not supposed 
to take food and drink into the library, but 
rules are made to be broken. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1942 in F. Gruber’s 
Gift Horse.
the rotten apple spoils the barrel