237
safe bind, safe fi nd  If you fasten things 
securely before you leave, or lock some-
body or something away, they will still 
be there when you return: “‘I’ll privately 
turn the key on her, in case she wakes 
before we come back. Safe bind, safe 
fi nd—you know the proverb!’” (Wilkie 
Collins, No Name, 1862). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in the form “Fast 
bind, fast fi nd.”
safety fi rst  Safety issues should always 
be the fi rst consideration: This company 
has adopted a safety fi rst policy. This proverb 
dates back to 1929, when it appeared in 
W. R. Inge’s Assessment and Anticipation: 
“‘Safety fi rst’ is all very well when we 
are preparing to cross a street or board 
an omnibus.”
Saturday’s child works hard for its living 
Children born on a Saturday are sup-
posed to be industrious and hardwork-
ing: Both her sons were born on a Saturday, 
and neither of them has bothered to look for 
a job since leaving college. So much for the 
saying “Saturday’s child works hard for its 
living”! The proverb is the sixth line of a 
traditional rhyme beginning “Monday’s 
child is fair of face.” See entries at the 
days of the week for other proverbs from 
this rhyme.
save at the spigot and waste at the 
bung  See spare at the spigot, and let 
out the bunghole.
save something for a rainy day  It is 
sensible to put money aside in case it is 
needed in the future: He remembered his 
grandmother’s advice to save something for a 
rainy day. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1583 in J. Stubbes’s Anatomie of Abuses.
save us from our friends  Our friends 
can cause us far more harm or trouble 
than our enemies; usually—but not 
exclusively—applied to false, treacher-
ous, or disloyal friends: She says she felt 
compelled, as one of my oldest friends, to tell 
my employers about my alcohol problem. All 
I can say is, “Save us from our friends!” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with differ-
ent wording, in 1477. Queen Elizabeth 
I is alleged to have said, in 1585, “There 
is an Italian proverb which saith, From 
my enemy let me defend myself; but 
from a pretensed friend, good Lord 
deliver me.”
Variant of this proverb: God pro-
tect me from my friends—I can protect 
myself from my enemies.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: with friends like that, who 
needs enemies?
s
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   237 1/29/07   5:12:57 PM
238
saving is getting  Money that is got 
through saving is as valuable as money that 
is earned. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1642 in G. Torriano’s Select Italian Prov-
erbs: “Saving is the fi rst getting.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a penny saved is a penny earned.
scrambled eggs can’t be unscram-
bled  See you can’t unscramble eggs.
scratch a Russian and you fi nd a Tartar 
What a person claims to be may be different 
from what he or she actually is: “Until a short 
time ago the aphorism, ‘Scratch a Russian and 
you fi nd a Tartar,’ was the sum of British com-
prehension of the Russian character” (Brit-
ish Spectator, 1911). Attributed to Napoleon 
Bonaparte (1769–1821), the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1823, but with 
the implication that it was already in gen-
eral use. Other words may be substituted 
for Russian and Tartar, as in the Republican 
slogan “Scratch a Democrat and you will 
fi nd a rebel.”
second thoughts are best  Do not act 
on impulse: “Second thoughts, they say, are 
best:/I’ll consider of it once again” (John 
Dryden, The Spanish Friar, 1681). The prov-
239
erb is of ancient origin, occurring in Eurip-
ides’ Hippolytus (fi fth century b.c.): “The 
second thoughts are invariably wiser.”
a secret is either too good to keep or 
too bad not to tell  It is very hard to 
keep a secret of any kind: You’ll never 
believe what Megan’s planning to do to that 
guy who dumped her last week. It’s a secret, of 
course, but you know what they say—a secret is 
either too good to keep or too bad not to tell. 
The proverb is a regional expression in the 
United States.
a secret’s a secret until it’s told  When 
you pass on a secret to somebody else, it 
ceases to be a secret: “Don’t tell anybody 
else—it’s a secret.” “It can’t be—a secret’s a 
secret until it’s told.”
Variant of this proverb: a secret 
shared is no secret.
see a pin and pick it up, all the day 
you’ll have good luck; see a pin and 
let it lay, bad luck you’ll have all the 
day  According to popular superstition, 
if you see a pin lying around, it is lucky 
to pick it up and unlucky not to; also 
used to encourage thriftiness: See a pin 
and pick it up, all the day you’ll have good 
luck—and you might also prevent somebody 
from getting a painful surprise if they kneel 
240
down or walk around barefoot. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1843.
Variants of this proverb: fi nd a penny, 
pick it up, all day long you’ll have good 
luck; see a pin and pick it up, all the day 
you’ll have good luck; see a pin and let it 
lie, you’ll want a pin before you die.
seeing is believing  People are often 
reluctant to believe something until they 
see it for themselves, but nobody doubts 
the evidence of his or her own eyes: “‘if you 
had seen de great huge pieces of de plate 
so massive, Sir Arthur,—so fi ne fashion, 
Miss Wardour—and de silver cross dat we 
did fi nd . . . you would have believed then.’ 
‘Seeing is believing indeed’” (Sir Walter 
Scott, The Antiquary, 1816). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1609.
seek and you shall fi nd  You must make 
a personal effort to get what you want: 
“‘What would you have me do?’ said 
Fernand. ‘How do I know? Is it my affair? 
I am not in love with Mademoiselle 
Mercedes; but for you—in the words 
of the gospel, seek, and you shall fi nd’” 
(Alexandre Dumas, The Count of Monte 
Cristo, 1844–45). The proverb is of bibli-
cal origin: “Ask, and it shall be given you; 
seek, and ye shall fi nd; knock, and it shall 
be opened unto you” (Matthew 7:7).
see no evil, hear no evil, speak no 
evil  Ignore any wrongdoing, malice, or 
gossip that is going on around you, and 
do not get involved: It’s no use asking him 
about the latest offi ce intrigue—his motto 
is “See no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil.” 
First recorded in 1926, the proverb is 
associated with a representation of three 
monkeys with their hands over their eyes, 
ears, and mouth, respectively.
seize the day  Live for the present, and 
take full advantage of every moment: 
Nobody knows what the future may hold, so 
seize the day. The proverb comes from the 
writings of the Roman poet Horace (65–8 
b.c.) and is often used in its original Latin 
form, “Carpe diem.” It was popularized in 
the late 20th century as the motto of the 
charismatic and unconventional English 
teacher John Keating, played by Robin 
Williams, in the movie Dead Poets Society 
(1989): “Carpe diem, lads! Seize the day! 
Make your lives extraordinary.”
Variant of this proverb: seize the 
moment.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomor-
row we die; gather ye rosebuds while 
ye may; life is short and time is swift; 
the mill cannot grind with the water 
that is past; take time by the forelock.
seldom seen, soon forgotten  Persons 
or things rarely seen or mentioned are 
quickly forgotten: At fi rst he seemed quite 
upset about the break-up of their relationship, 
but after a few weeks it was a case of seldom 
seen, soon forgotten. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1350 in the Douce MS.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
out of sight, out of mind.
self-deceit is the easiest of any  It is 
easy to convince yourself of something 
that you want to believe: She has persuaded 
herself that she is innocent of the charge, but 
self-deceit is the easiest of any, and she will 
fi nd it more diffi cult to persuade the judge and 
jury. The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
self-interest is the rule, self-sacrifi ce the 
exception  People are far more con-
seeing is believing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   240 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
241
cerned with looking after their own inter-
ests than with sacrifi cing their needs for 
the sake of others: It was one of those rare 
occurrences, an act of pure altruism, in a world 
where self-interest is the rule and self-sacrifi ce 
the exception. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
self-praise is no recommendation 
Boast ful talk about your own abilities or 
achievements does not impress others, 
and may have the opposite effect—people 
often distrust those who have too high an 
opinion of themselves: “Self-praise is no 
recommendation, but I may say for myself 
that I am not so bad a man of business” 
(Charles Dickens, Bleak House, 1853). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1826, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: toot your own horn lest the same 
be never tooted.
self-preservation is the fi rst law of 
nature  Survival is the primary natural 
instinct of all living things; used when 
people take action to protect themselves 
or their own interests: The strike failed 
because not enough people were prepared to put 
their own jobs on the line for the sake of some-
body else’s—self-preservation is the fi rst law of 
nature. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
the English poet John Donne’s Biathana-
tos, a defense of suicide, probably written 
c. 1610 but not published until 1646: “It is 
onley upon this reason, that selfe-preser-
vation is of Naturall Law.”  The sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin, occur-
ring in the writings of Cicero (106–43 
b.c.): “primamque ex natura hanc habere 
appetitionem, ut conservemus nosmet ipsos [by 
nature our fi rst impulse is to preserve 
ourselves].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every man for himself and the devil 
take the hindmost.
send a fool to market and a fool he’ll 
return  It is unrealistic to expect a fool 
to change into anything but a fool: “You 
may go back again, like a fool as you 
came” (Jonathan Swift, Polite Conversation, 
1738). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1586 in G. Whitney’s Emblems. Variants of 
this proverb have the fool being sent “to 
France” or simply “far.”
set a beggar on horseback, and he’ll 
ride to the devil  People who suddenly 
acquire wealth or power are likely to be 
corrupted by it: “‘Set a beggar on horse-
back, and he’ll ride to the devil,’ . . . some 
of these early manufacturers did ride to 
the devil in magnifi cent style” (Elizabeth 
Gaskell, North and South, 1855).
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1669, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it 
to death.
set a sprat to catch a mackerel  See 
throw out a sprat to catch a mack-
erel.
set a thief to catch a thief  A person 
who has been involved in wrongdoing—
especially a reformed criminal—is good 
at catching others, because he or she can 
understand their thinking and anticipate 
their actions: “‘Set a thief to catch a thief,’ 
said Mr. Stryker, with his usual dry man-
ner. ‘I don’t believe in the full success of 
your virtuous diplomatist. How is a man 
to know all the turnings and windings of 
 set a thief to catch a thief
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   241 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
242
the road that leads to treaties, unless he 
has gone over it himself?’” (Susan Feni-
more Cooper, Elinor Wyllys, 1846). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1665, but with the implication that it 
had long been in general use. The senti-
ment it expresses occurs in the writings 
of the poet Callimachus (third century 
b.c.): “being a thief myself I recognized 
the tracks of a thief.”
Variant of this proverb: it takes a 
thief to catch a thief.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: it takes one to know one; an old 
poacher makes the best gamekeeper.
share and share alike  Things must be 
shared equally and fairly among those 
who want or have a right to their part: 
“‘Drink, Henry Fray—drink,’ magnani-
mously said Jan Coggan, a person who 
held Saint-Simonian notions of share and 
share alike where liquor was concerned, 
as the vessel showed signs of approach-
ing him in its gradual revolution among 
them. (Thomas Hardy, Far from the Mad-
ding Crowd, 1874). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1564.
the sharper the storm, the sooner it’s 
over  The more unpleasant something 
is, the less time it lasts: The unfortunate 
students who found themselves on the receiv-
ing end of his outbursts of rage used to console 
themselves with the saying “The sharper the 
storm, the sooner it’s over.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, in its variant form, 
in 1872. The sentiment it expresses, 
however, is of ancient origin: compare 
Seneca (c. 4 b.c.–a.d. 65), “procellae, 
quanto plus habent virium, tanto minus tem-
poris [the harder storms are, the shorter 
they last].”
Variant of this proverb: the harder 
the storm, the sooner it’s over.
the sheep that bleats loses a mouthful 
See a bleating sheep loses a bite.
shit happens  Sometimes you must 
resign yourself to the inevitability of bad 
things happening: The detective shrugged. “I 
don’t know why she died. She was just unlucky. 
Shit happens.” The proverb appears to 
be of late 20th-century U.S. origin. 
shit or get off the pot  See piss or get 
off the pot.
the shoe is on the other foot  The situ-
ation has been reversed: Now the shoe is on 
the other foot, and those responsible for laying 
off half the workforce are fi ghting to save their 
own jobs. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
the 19th century in the form “The boot is 
on the other leg.”
Variant of this proverb: the boot is 
on the other foot.
the shoemaker’s child always goes bare-
foot  People often fail to benefi t from 
the professional skills of those closest 
to them: “My mother always used to 
say, ‘The shoemaker’s family goes bare-
foot.’ Well . . . I married a plumber and 
every faucet in our house drips” (Wash-
ington Times, 1996). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in 
1546. Other words may be substituted 
for child, such as son, wife, or family, as in 
the quotation.
Variant of this proverb: the cobbler’s 
children go barefoot.
shoot fi rst and ask questions after-
ward  In certain circumstances—for 
share and share alike
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   242 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
243
example, when facing a potentially dan-
gerous person or thing—it is safer not 
to lose time weighing up the situation 
before taking action; often used in contexts 
criticizing such hasty or arbitrary behavior: 
“It struck her, too, that war seemed to 
have made the people on that side of the 
ocean extremely ready with weapons. They 
would be quite likely to shoot fi rst and ask 
questions afterward—which would be too 
late to be helpful” (Mary Roberts Rinehart, 
The Amazing Interlude, 1918).
Variant of this proverb: shoot fi rst, 
ask questions later.
a short horse is soon curried  A small 
task is soon done: A short horse is soon cur-
ried—it won’t take long to put the room back 
to rights. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1350 in Douce MS 52.
short reckonings make long friends  If 
you want to keep your friends, and retain 
goodwill in business, always pay your 
debts and settle your accounts promptly: 
“‘I will repay you in a minute,’ returned 
Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he 
spoke, counted out a hundred and forty 
francs, and pushed them towards Mme. 
Vauquer. ‘Short reckonings make good 
friends,’ he added” (Honoré de Balzac, 
Father Goriot, 1835). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1673 (J. Dare, 
Counsellor Manners) but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
short visits make long friends  People 
are unlikely to establish lasting friendships 
with visitors who outstay their welcome: 
The vicar did not appear to be familiar with 
the old saying “short visits make long friends,” 
for he stayed for over an hour. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1923 in Folk-Lore.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
fish and guests stink after three days.
show me a liar and I will show you a 
thief  People who are prepared to tell 
lies are likely to be dishonest in other ways 
too. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1607 in R. West’s The Court of Conscience.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a liar is worse than a thief.
the show must go on  Things must con-
tinue as if nothing had happened; used 
when events or circumstances threaten 
to disrupt something planned: The show 
must go on, as they say, and we cannot post-
pone the conference just because one of the 
delegates has been unfortunate enough to 
fall down the stairs and break his leg. Of 
theatrical origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1867 in the Dictionary of 
Americanisms.
shrouds have no pockets  Wealth and 
possessions are of no use to you after you 
are dead; often used to justify extravagant 
spending: There’s no point in hoarding money 
at your age—you have no children to leave it 
to, and shrouds have no pockets. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in 1854.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t take it with you.
a shut mouth catches no fl ies  It is 
often safest or wisest to say nothing: 
To avoid the risk of incriminating myself, I 
remained silent—a shut mouth catches no 
fl ies. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1599 in the form “In a closed up mouth a 
fl y cannot get in.”
Variant of this proverb: a closed 
mouth catches no fl ies.
 a shut mouth catches no fl ies
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   243 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
244
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a still tongue makes a wise head.
silence gives consent  Those who do 
not reply to a request or accusation, or 
who raise no objection to something said 
or done, are assumed to have acquiesced: 
“Of course I ought to have known that 
you could not care for a man like me, a 
stranger. Silence gives consent. Yes? Eh? 
I don’t want any of that sort of consent. 
And unless some day you fi nd you can 
speak . . . No! No! I shall never ask 
you” (Joseph Conrad, Chance, 1913). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, c. 1380 by John Wycliffe.
Variant of this proverb: silence 
means consent.
silence is golden  Silence is a quality 
of great value; often used as advice to 
say nothing, but also applied to a lack of 
environmental noise: “Silence is golden, 
as her father used to say when she used to 
fl y into tempers and wanted to say nasty 
things to everybody within range” (Aldous 
Huxley, Antic Hay, 1923). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1865 (W. White, 
Eastern England), but with the implication 
that it was already in general use.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: there is a time to speak, and a time 
to be silent; think before you speak; a 
word spoken is past recalling.
silence is the fi ttest reply to folly  The 
best way to respond to a foolish remark 
or action is to ignore it: I treated her ill-
informed and bigoted comments with the con-
tempt they deserved and said nothing—silence 
is the fi ttest reply to folly. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1948 in a U.S. proverb 
collection.
Variant of this proverb: silence is the 
best answer to the stupid.
silence means consent  See silence 
gives consent.
silly question, silly answer  See ask 
a silly question and you get a silly 
answer.
sin, sorrow, and work are the things that 
men can’t shirk  Nobody can lead a life 
that is utterly virtuous, happy, or idle: I 
wish I could stay longer, but I must get back 
to the offi ce—sin, sorrow, and work are the 
things that men can’t shirk. The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
sing before breakfast, cry before 
night  Those who wake up feeling happy 
and carefree often encounter sorrow or 
trouble before the end of the day: There 
must be some truth in the saying “Sing before 
breakfast, cry before night”—I often fi nd that 
my mood changes dramatically during the 
course of the day. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in J. 
Palsgrave’s L’éclaircissement de la Langue 
Française (1530).
Variants of this proverb: if you sing 
before breakfast, you’ll cry before supper; 
laugh before breakfast, cry before sunset.
six hours’ sleep for a man, seven for a 
woman, and eight for a fool  Women 
need more sleep than men, but only fools 
sleep for eight hours or more: “John Wes-
ley . . . considered that fi ve hours’ sleep 
was enough for him or any man. . . . The 
old English proverb, so often in the mouth 
of George III, was ‘six hours for a man, 
seven for a woman, and eight for a fool’” 
silence gives consent
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   244 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
245
(J. H. Friswell, The Gentle Life, 1864). The 
quotation is the fi rst recorded use of the 
proverb in this form, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of earlier origin. Variants 
of the proverb recommend fi ve or seven 
hours’ sleep for travelers, six or seven for 
students and scholars, eight for workmen, 
merchants, or children, and they say that 
only fools, knaves, or “lazy bodies” need 
more.
the sky’s the limit  There is virtually no 
limit to what can be achieved, earned, or 
spent: “Teenoso was one colt who proved 
himself a dream horse by remaining in 
training after winning a Derby deemed of 
dubious quality; a year later he won the 
King George VI and Queen Elizabeth. ‘The 
sky’s the limit for a four-year-old, though 
the opportunities in the Pattern are not 
there for fi llies,’ Geoff Wragg, Teenoso’s 
trainer, said” (Independent, 1989).
sleep is the brother of death  Sleep 
and death are related: “How wonderful is 
Death, Death his brother Sleep!” (Percy 
Bysshe Shelley, Queen Mab, 1813). The 
proverb is ultimately of Greek origin 
and appeared in the writings of Homer. 
Its earliest appearance in English dates 
from 1563, in The Mirror of Magistrates. 
The word brother is sometimes replaced 
by cousin.
a slice off a cut loaf isn’t missed  You 
can get away with wrongdoing, such as 
adultery or petty theft, if you are not the 
fi rst person to do it, or if the offended 
party is unlikely to notice the result: He 
tried to justify his behavior with sayings of 
dubious morality, such as “A slice off a cut 
loaf isn’t missed.” The proverb comes from 
Shakespeare’s play Titus Andronicus (2:1; 
1592): “What, man! more water glideth 
by the mill/Than wots the miller of; and 
easy it is/Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we 
know.”
Variant of this proverb: you never 
miss a slice from a cut loaf.
a slip of the lip will sink a ship  See 
loose lips sink ships.
sloth is the mother of poverty  The less 
work you do, the less money you will 
earn. If it were true that sloth is the mother 
of poverty, there would be no such thing as the 
idle rich. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1669 in Politeuphuia.
Variant of this proverb: sloth is the 
key to poverty.
sloth makes all things diffi cult, but 
industry makes all things easy  See all 
things are easy to industry, all things 
difficult to sloth.
slow and steady wins the race  Those 
who work or proceed at a gentle steady 
pace are more likely to achieve success 
than those who rush: We generally fi nd 
that students of average ability who apply 
themselves diligently throughout the course do 
better in their fi nal examinations than brighter 
students who leave all their studying to the last 
minute—slow and steady wins the race. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
Robert Lloyd’s poem “The Hare and the 
Tortoise” (1762): “The bets were won, 
the Hare awake,/When thus the victor 
Tortoise spake./ . . . /You may deride my 
awkward pace/But slow and steady wins 
the race.” The poem retells Aesop’s fable 
of the same name, dating from the sixth 
century b.c., about a race between these 
two animals. The hare sets off at great 
 slow and steady wins the race
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   245 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
246
speed, stops for a rest and falls asleep, 
and wakes up to fi nd that the tortoise has 
plodded past it to the fi nishing line.
Variant of this proverb: slow but sure 
wins the race.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: fair and softly goes far in a day; 
make haste slowly; the race is not 
to the swift, nor the battle to the 
strong.
slow but sure  Something that is done 
slowly and carefully is more likely to be 
done thoroughly and correctly than some-
thing that is done in haste: “But, the lan-
guage of that country was quite gone from 
her, and she was forced to make signs. So 
she went on, getting better from day to 
day, slow, but sure, and trying to learn 
the names of common things” (Charles 
Dickens, David Copperfi eld, 1850). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1692. It has 
given rise to the adverbial phrase slowly 
but surely.
slow but sure wins the race  See slow 
and steady wins the race.
small choice in rotten apples  When 
faced with two or more equally undesir-
able options, it matters little which one 
you choose: “You can come shopping with 
me or you can stay at home and clean your 
room—which would you rather do?” “Small 
choice in rotten apples.” The proverb comes 
from Shakespeare’s play The Taming of the 
Shrew (1:1; 1593).
a small gift usually gets small thanks  If 
you give people less than they expect, 
they may be less grateful than you would 
like: I was not surprised by her lukewarm 
response—a small gift gets small thanks, and 
she is probably accustomed to receiving much 
more generous tips from her clients.
small is beautiful  Smallness can be an 
attractive and desirable quality: “In the 
19th century, some classical composers 
forgot (if they had ever known) the prin-
ciple that ‘small is beautiful’” (Washington 
Post, 1991). The proverb was fi rst used in 
1973 as the title of a book by the German-
born British economist E. F. Schumacher.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the best things come in small 
packages; little fish are sweet.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: big is beautiful.
small leaks sink big ships  See little 
leaks sink the ship.
small sorrows speak; great ones are 
silent  People are usually happy to talk 
about minor sorrows but tend to avoid dis-
cussing greater sadnesses: “The grief that 
does not speak whispers the o’er-fraught 
heart and bids it break” (William Shake-
speare, Macbeth). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1587 in T. Hughes’s 
The Misfortunes of Arthur, although it is ulti-
mately of ancient origin, appearing in the 
writings of Seneca.
small things affect light minds  See 
little things please little minds.
soft and fair goes far  Much can be 
achieved by adopting a calm and gentle 
approach: “Soft and fair, young lady. You 
that are going to be married think things 
can never be done too fast” (Oliver Gold-
smith, The Good-Natured Man, 1768). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1400 in 
Beryn.
slow but sure
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   246 1/29/07   5:12:59 PM
247
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the meek shall inherit the earth; 
softly, softly, catchee monkey.
a soft answer turns away wrath  A gen-
tle response will calm an angry person: 
“Speak briefl y and to the point, and even 
if the call is a disagreeable one, follow the 
proverb that ‘A soft answer turneth away 
wrath’” (Milla Alihan, Corporate Etiquette, 
1974). The proverb is of biblical origin in 
its current form: “A soft answer turneth 
away wrath: but grievous words stir up 
anger” (Proverbs 15:1). A facetious exten-
sion of the proverb is “A soft answer turns 
away wrath but has little effect on a door-
to-door salesman.”
softly, softly, catchee monkey  A 
patient, careful, and gentle approach is 
best when trying to catch a wily or elusive 
person or thing, especially a criminal: The 
operation must be carefully planned and followed 
through—softly, softly, catchee monkey. The 
proverb was first recorded in 1907 in 
G. Benham’s Cassell’s Book of Quotations.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: easy does it; soft and fair goes 
far.
so goes Maine, so goes the nation  See 
as maine goes, so goes the nation.
soldiers and travelers may lie in 
authority  See a traveler may lie with 
authority.
so many countries, so many customs 
Different nations and peoples have dif-
ferent ways of doing things, codes of 
behavior, and so on: When traveling abroad, 
remember the saying “So many countries, so 
many customs”—what is considered a friendly 
gesture in one place may be interpreted as an 
insult in another. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1582, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin, 
occurring in Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde 
(c. 1385): “In sondry londes [lands], son-
dry ben usages.”
Variant of this proverb: every coun-
try has its own customs.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every land has its own law; when 
in rome, do as the romans do.
so many men, so many opinions  Every-
body has his or her own way of thinking: 
The saying “So many men, so many opinions” 
was amply illustrated by the lively discussion at 
yesterday’s meeting, and it seems unlikely that 
agreement will ever be reached. The proverb is 
of ancient origin, occurring in the Roman 
poet Terence’s Phormio (second century 
b.c.): “quot homines tot sententiae.” It was 
fi rst recorded in English in Chaucer’s Can-
terbury Tales (c. 1390) in the form “As many 
heddes, as many wittes ther been.”
Variant of this proverb: as many 
men, as many opinions.
some folks speak from experience; oth-
ers, from experience, don’t speak  Peo-
ple often learn from experience that there 
are times when it is better to say nothing: 
There had been similar unrest at my previous 
workplace, and when I argued against the 
proposed strike—which subsequently failed—I 
was shouted down. So this time I kept my mouth 
shut—some folks speak from experience; others, 
from experience, don’t speak.
something is better than nothing  It is 
better to have or get less than we desire 
than nothing at all: I gave her a couple of dol-
lars—not much, I know, but something is better 
 something is better than nothing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   247 1/29/07   5:12:59 PM
248
than nothing. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1546, but a French equivalent 
was in use in the early 15th century.
Variant of this proverb: better some-
thing than nothing.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
half a loaf is better than no bread.
something is rotten in the state of 
Denmark  There is something wrong, or 
something suspicious going on, in a place, 
organization, or system; often used to 
imply corruption: “To the Parisian com-
mon man, meanwhile, one thing remains 
inconceivable: that now when the Bastille 
is down, and French Liberty restored, 
grain should continue so dear. . . . Is it 
Aristocrat forestallers; a Court still bent 
on intrigues? Something is rotten, some-
where” (Thomas Carlyle, The French Revo-
lution, 1837). The proverb comes from 
Shakespeare’s play Hamlet (1:4; 1600–01). 
It is often used in a shortened and allusive 
form, as in the quotation, or with another 
name in place of Denmark.
a son is a son till he gets him a wife, 
a daughter’s a daughter all of her 
life  Men tend to neglect or lose contact 
with their parents after marriage, whereas 
women maintain the bonds of fi lial affec-
tion and loyalty throughout their lives: I 
hardly ever see Frank and his family, though they 
live much closer than Annabel, who still comes 
to visit me once a month. I guess I shouldn’t 
be surprised—a son is a son till he gets him a 
wife, a daughter’s a daughter all of her life. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1670 (John 
Ray, A Collection of English Proverbs).
Variant of this proverb: my son is 
my son till he gets him a wife, but my 
daughter’s my daughter all the days 
of her life.
the sooner begun, the sooner done  The 
sooner you make a start on some-
thing—especially a diffi cult or unpleas-
ant task—the sooner it will be fi nished: 
I’m not looking forward to clearing out the 
attic, but the sooner begun, the sooner done. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1578 
in T. Garter’s Most Virtuous Susanna.
sooner said than done  See easier said 
than done.
soon ripe, soon rotten  Precocious tal-
ent or premature success is often short-
lived: “Very few prize boys and girls 
stand the test of wear. Prodigies are 
almost always uncertain; they illustrate 
the proverb of ‘soon ripe, soon rot-
ten’” (Samuel Smiles, Life and Labour, 
1887). Of Latin origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English, with differ-
ent wording, in William Langland’s Piers 
Plowman (c. 1377).
Variants of this proverb: early 
ripe, early rotten; quick ripe, quick 
rotten.
sorrow comes unsent for  Sorrows will 
descend upon all individuals, however 
unwelcome they may be. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1579 in Edmund Spens-
er’s The Shepheardes Calendar: “Sorrow, ne 
neede be hastened on:/For he will come 
without calling anon.”
Variants of this proverb: sorrow and 
ill weather come uninvited; sorrow is 
soon enough when it comes.
sow dry and set wet  Seeds should be 
sown in dry soil and seedlings should be 
planted in wet soil: The old country saying 
“Sow dry and set wet” has a sound scientifi c 
basis—too much moisture will rot the seed 
something is rotten in the state of Denmark
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   248 1/29/07   5:12:59 PM
249
before it has a chance to germinate. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1660: S. Riders, 
Riders: 1660 British Merlin.
sow the wind and reap the whirlwind  See 
they that sow the wind shall reap the 
whirlwind.
spare and have is better than spend and 
crave  It is better to use your money 
wisely, keeping some in reserve, than to 
spend it all and fi nd yourself in need: I 
resisted the temptation to blow my winnings 
on an expensive vacation—spare and have 
is better than spend and crave. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1758, in Benjamin 
Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
spare well and have to spend.
spare at the spigot, and let out the 
bunghole  Those who are reluctant to 
part with small sums of money are often 
careless or extravagant in their spend-
ing on other things; also used to warn 
against false economy: “People are often 
saving at the wrong place. . . . They spare 
at the spigot, and let all run away at the 
250
bunghole” (E. J. Hardy, How to Be Happy 
though Married, 1885). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1642 in a collection of 
Italian proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: save at the 
spigot and waste at the bung.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
penny wise and pound foolish.
spare the rod and spoil the child  Firm 
discipline is necessary for a good upbring-
ing; used to justify the punishment of 
children when they misbehave, specifi -
cally to justify corporal punishment: “‘I 
shall govern by affection, Mr. Harrison.’ 
‘It won’t do,’ said Mr. Harrison, ‘won’t do 
at all, Anne. “Spare the rod and spoil the 
child.’” (Lucy Maud Montgomery, Anne of 
Avonlea, 1909). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “He that spareth his rod hateth his 
son: but he that loveth him chasteneth 
him betimes” (Proverbs 13:24).
251
spare well and have to spend  If you do 
not waste money you will always be able 
to afford the things you need: “Spare well 
and have to spend” was his motto, but he seemed 
to place far greater emphasis on the sparing 
than on the spending, and his reputation as a 
miser was not unjustifi ed. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1541.
Variant of this proverb: spare well 
and spend well.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: spare and have is better than spend 
and crave; spare when you’re young 
and spend when you’re old.
spare when you’re young and spend 
when you’re old  People who were 
thrifty in their youth can afford to be 
extravagant in their old age: I’m paying 
as much as I can afford into a private pension 
plan, on the basis of the saying “Spare when 
you’re young and spend when you’re old.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1721, in 
H. Bullinger’s Christian State of Matrimony.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
spare well and have to spend.
speak not of my debts unless you mean 
to pay them  It is considered rude or 
tactless to mention another person’s 
debts: I had heard rumors that his company 
was in severe fi nancial trouble, so I tried to steer 
the conversation onto other matters, remember-
ing the adage “Speak not of my debts unless 
you mean to pay them.” The proverb is fi rst 
recorded in George Herbert’s Outlandish 
Proverbs (1640).
speak of the devil and he always 
appears   People often appear unexpect-
edly when others are talking about them; 
said when such a coincidence occurs: I hear 
Jack’s found himself a job at last. . . . Ah, here he 
is, so he can tell us all about it. Speak of the devil 
and he’s sure to appear! The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666 in the form “Talk of the 
devil, and he’s presently at your elbow.” It 
is often used in the shortened and allusive 
form “Speak of the devil.”
Variants of this proverb: talk of the 
devil and he’s sure to appear; talk about 
the devil and his imps will appear.
speak softly and carry a big stick  Do 
not threaten violence or provoke aggres-
sion, but be prepared to use great force 
if the need arises: Their policy of  “Speak 
softly and carry a big stick” seems at last to 
have brought peace to the streets of the city. 
The proverb was popularized in a speech 
made in 1901 by President Theodore 
Roosevelt: “There is a homely old adage 
which runs: ‘Speak softly and carry a big 
stick; you will go far.’ If the American 
nation will speak softly and yet build and 
keep at a pitch of the highest training a 
thoroughly effi cient navy, the Monroe 
Doctrine will go far” (Speech at the Min-
nesota State Fair).
speak the truth and shame the devil  See 
tell the truth and shame the devil.
speak well of the dead  See never speak 
ill of the dead.
speech is silver, but silence is golden  It 
is good to speak, but sometimes it is bet-
ter still to say nothing: “She will give a 
pound note to the collection if I would 
cut my eloquence short, so in this case, 
though speech is silver, silence is certainly 
golden” (Winifred Holtby, South Riding, 
1936). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1834, with the implication that it was of 
Swiss origin.
 speech is silver, but silence is golden
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   251 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
252
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: there is a time to speak and a time 
to be silent; think before you speak; a 
word spoken is past recalling.
the spirit is willing but the fl esh is 
weak  People are often physically inca-
pable of doing what they want to do, or 
what they know they ought to do; often 
used as an excuse: “Since then I have 
written many other books; and though 
ceasing my methodical study of the old 
masters (for though the spirit is willing, 
the fl esh is weak), I have continued with 
increasing assiduity to try to write bet-
ter” (W. Somerset Maugham, The Sum-
ming Up, 1938). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “Watch and pray, that ye enter 
not into temptation: the spirit indeed is 
willing, but the fl esh is weak” (Matthew 
26:41).
the squeaky wheel gets the grease 
Those who complain the most loudly or 
persistently, or who make the most fuss, 
get what they want: “Do as others have 
done—put heat on your state legislature 
and urge your friends to do the same. The 
wheel that squeaks get the oil” (Washington 
Post, 1990). The proverb is attributed to 
the U.S. humorist Josh Billings, alias 
Henry Wheeler Shaw (1818–85), in the 
form “The wheel that squeaks the loudest 
is the one that gets the grease.”
Variants of this proverb: the squeaky 
wheel gets the oil; the wheel that does the 
squeaking is the one that gets the grease.
stand on your own two feet  Do not be 
dependent on others: Stand on your own 
two feet—your parents will not be around 
forever, and you must learn to be more self-
reliant. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in L. Fioravanti’s Compendium of Rational 
Secrets (1582).
step on a crack, break your mother’s 
back  It is unlucky to walk on the cracks 
between paving slabs on the sidewalk; a 
childish superstition, or used in a chil-
dren’s game: “Look out!” cried my young 
nephew, as I was about to put my foot down, 
“Step on a crack, break your mother’s back!”
a stern chase is a long chase  It takes 
a long time to catch up with something or 
somebody moving ahead of you in the same 
direction: “English poetry has had a start of 
some centuries, and a stern chase is prover-
bially a long one” (J. A. Bridges, Victorian 
Recollections, 1919). First re corded in 1823, 
the proverb is of nautical origin—a stern 
chase is a chase at sea in which one vessel 
follows in the wake of another.
sticks and stones may break my bones, 
but names will never hurt me  Verbal 
abuse, malicious remarks, or defamatory 
statements do no physical harm; often 
said by children to those who call them 
names: When the other kids teased me about 
the clothes my mother made me wear, I would 
reply, “Sticks and stones may break my bones, 
but names will never hurt me.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in G. F. Northall’s Folk-
Phrases (1894).
Variant of this proverb: sticks and 
stones may break my bones, but words 
will never hurt me.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
hard words break no bones.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
the tongue is not steel, but it cuts.
stick to your guns  Stand by your prin-
ciples or convictions, assert your rights, and 
the spirit is willing but the fl esh is weak
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   252 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
253
refuse to compromise: Stick to your guns—to 
give way on this issue would be interpreted as 
a sign of weakness. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in James 
Boswell’s The Life of Samuel Johnson (1791): 
“Mrs. Thrale stood to her gun with great 
courage, in defence of amorous ditties.”
a still tongue makes a wise head  A 
wise person knows when it is best to keep 
silent; also used to imply that wisdom is 
gained by listening and thinking rather than 
talking all the time: When people commented 
that her son was unusually quiet for a boy of his 
age, she would reply, “A still tongue makes a wise 
head.” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1562 in the Works of John Heywood.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a shut mouth catches no flies.
still waters run deep  People who are 
quiet and reserved often have a deeply 
passionate nature and may surprise others 
by doing something that is apparently out 
of character: “‘Madame Odintsov is very 
charming, but she is so cold and reserved 
that . . .’ ‘Still waters run deep, you know,’ 
interposed Bazarov. ‘You say she is cold; 
that just adds to the fl avor. You like ices, I 
expect’ ” (Ivan Turgenev, Fathers and Sons, 
1862). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English c. 1400 in the form “Where the 
fl ood is deepest the water stands still-
est.” It occurs in Shakespeare’s play Henry 
VI, Part 2 (3:1; 1592), “Smooth runs the 
water where the brook is deep,/And in his 
simple show he harbours treason.”
Variant of this proverb: still water 
runs deep.
a stitch in time saves nine  Prompt 
attention to minor problems will avoid 
major problems later: “‘We could set it up 
as good as new in a day. For I daresay your 
lot would turn to and give us a hand?’ 
‘You see if we don’t,’ said Wicks. ‘So be it, 
then,’ concluded Trent. ‘A stitch in time 
saves nine.’” (Robert Louis Stevenson, 
The Wrecker, 1892). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1732. It is believed that the 
number nine was chosen because it almost 
rhymes with time.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: an ounce of prevention is worth 
a pound of cure; prevention is bet-
ter than cure; who repairs not his 
gutters repairs his whole house.
stolen fruit is sweet  See forbidden 
fruit is sweet; stolen waters are 
sweet.
stolen waters are sweet  Illicit pleasures 
are often all the more enjoyable for this 
reason; also used of the pleasure derived 
from stolen goods or ill-gotten gains: He 
reckons that no liquor tastes as good as the 
moonshine his uncle used to make, perhaps 
on the basis that stolen waters are sweet. 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Stolen 
waters are sweet, and bread eaten in 
secret is pleasant” (Proverbs 9:17).
Variants of this proverb: stolen fruit 
is sweet; stolen pleasures are sweetest.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
forbidden fruit is sweet.
stone-dead hath no fellow  There is 
nothing so fi nal as death; used by those in 
favor of capital punishment: “The execu-
tion of the death sentence had been post-
poned for a week, an unusual period in a 
country where the adage ‘stone-dead hath 
no fellow’ wins general support” (Lon-
don Times, 1926). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1633.
 stone-dead hath no fellow
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   253 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
254
stone walls do not a prison make  The 
mind and spirit are not imprisoned by 
merely physical restraints: “The poet 
assures us that—‘Stone walls do not a 
prison make,’ but a combination of the 
stone wall, the political parasite and the 
moral instructor is no garden of sweets” 
(Ambrose Bierce, Devil’s Dictionary, 
1911). The proverb comes from Richard 
Lovelace’s poem “To Althea, From Prison” 
(1642): “Stone walls do not a prison 
make/Nor iron bars a cage.”
straws show which way the wind 
blows  Small things, such as apparently 
trivial details or insignifi cant events, can 
be useful indicators of what is going 
to happen in the future: Journalists must 
learn to be highly observant, and not to 
dismiss any detail as insignifi cant—straws 
show which way the wind blows. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in John Selden’s Table 
Talk (c. 1654): “Take a straw and throw 
it up into the Air, you shall see by that 
which way the Wind is.” It-is probably of 
earlier origin, however, and-is attributed 
to Francis Bacon (1561–1626) in Lord 
Byron’s poem “Don Juan” (1819): “You 
know, or don’t know, that great Bacon 
saith,/‘Fling up a straw, ’twill show the 
way the wind blows.’” The proverb has 
given rise to the fi gurative phrases a straw 
in the wind and to know (or see, fi nd out,) 
which way the wind blows.
Variant of this proverb: it’s as well 
to know which way the wind blows.
a stream cannot rise above its 
source  Nothing can be greater or bet-
ter than what it comes from, or than the 
person who created it: “Just as it is true 
that a stream cannot rise above its source, 
so it is true that a national literature can-
not rise above the moral level of the social 
conditions of the people from whom it 
derives its inspiration” (James Connolly, 
Labour in Irish History, 1910). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1663.
Variant of this proverb: a stream 
never rises higher than its source.
the streets of hell are paved with 
promises  See the road to hell is 
paved with good intentions.
stretch your arm no further than your 
sleeve will reach  Do not try to live 
beyond your means, or to do more than 
you are capable of: Stretch your arm no fur-
ther than your sleeve will reach—you may be 
able to raise enough money to buy the boat, but 
can you afford all the running costs, mooring 
fees, and insurance? The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1541.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: cut your coat according to your 
cloth; everybody stretches his legs 
according to the length of his cov-
erlet.
strike while the iron is hot  Take advan-
tage of a favorable situation while it lasts: 
“Let George cut in directly and win her. 
. . . Strike while the iron’s hot” (William 
Makepeace Thackeray, Vanity Fair, 1848). 
An allusion to the work of the blacksmith, 
the proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): 
“Whil that iren is hoot, men sholden 
smyte.” The sentiment it expresses, how-
ever, is of ancient origin. The English poet 
John Dryden expanded on the metaphor 
in “Aeneis” (1697), his translation of Vir-
gil’s Aeneid: “We must beat the iron while 
it is hot, but we may polish it at leisure.” 
The U.S. writer Ambrose Bierce paro-
stone walls do not a prison make
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   254 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
255
died the proverb in his Devil’s Dictionary 
(1911): “Strike while your employer has 
a big contract.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: hoist your sail when the wind is 
fair; make hay while the sun shines.
strive not against the stream  Do not 
struggle against things that cannot be over-
come, or try to do the impossible; also 
used to encourage conformity: “Never 
strive against the stream, always drive the 
nail that will go” (Matthew Prior, Four Dia-
logues of the Dead, “The Vicar of Bray and 
Sir Thomas More,” c. 1721). Of ancient 
origin, the proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English c. 1300.
Variant of this proverb: it’s ill striv-
ing against the stream.
stuff a cold and starve a fever  See feed 
a cold and starve a fever.
a stumble may prevent a fall  A minor 
check may prevent greater disaster: It was 
an unfortunate setback, but we must remember 
that a stumble may prevent a fall. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1732 in Thomas 
Fuller’s Gnomologia.
Variant of this proverb: it’s a good 
horse that never stumbles.
the style is the man  A person’s style, 
especially in speaking and writing, is an 
indicator of his or her true nature: “‘The 
style is the man.’ This applies with pecu-
liar force to Paul. His style has been called 
‘the most personal that ever existed.’ It 
fi tly represents the force and fi re of his 
mind and the tender affections of his 
heart” (Philip Schaff, History of the Chris-
tian Church, 1883–93). First recorded in 
English in 1901, the proverb may be of 
Latin or French origin: in his Discours sur 
le style (1753), the Comte de Buffon said, 
“Ces choses sont hors de l’homme, le style est 
l’homme même [These things are external 
to the man; style is the man].”
success breeds success  One success 
leads to another: Success breeds success, 
and within a few years she had a chain of 
health-food stores stretching from coast to 
coast. The proverb was first recorded in 
1927 in N. Martin’s Mosaic.
Variants of this proverb: success 
begets success; success makes success as 
money makes money.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
nothing succeeds like success.
success has many fathers, while fail-
ure is an orphan  Everybody want to 
take credit for success, but nobody will 
take responsibility for failure: “In the 
aftermath of the impeccably executed 
aerial attack that initiated the war with 
Iraq, the old saw that success has many 
fathers while failure is an orphan comes 
to mind” (Washington Times, 1991). The 
proverb may have originated in the diary 
of Mussolini’s son-in-law, the Italian dip-
lomat Count Galeazzo Ciano (1903–44): 
“La vittoria trova cento padri, e nessuno vuole 
riconoscere l’insuccesso [Victory has a hun-
dred fathers, and nobody acknowledges 
a failure].”
Variant of this proverb: victory has a 
hundred fathers and defeat is an orphan.
success is never fi nal  You cannot afford 
to relax your efforts after a great achieve-
ment—you must keep working to main-
tain or improve your position: History is 
littered with examples of those who forgot that 
success is never fi nal in the world of politics.
 success is never fi nal
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   255 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
256
Variant of this proverb: success is 
never fi nal and failure is never fatal.
success makes success as money makes 
money  See success breeds success.
sue a beggar and catch a louse  There 
is nothing to be gained by seeking legal 
redress from those who cannot afford to 
pay: What is the point of entering into liti-
gation with a company on the verge of bank-
ruptcy? Sue a beggar and catch a louse. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 in J. 
Clarke’s Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina.
Variant of this proverb: sue a beggar 
and you’ll get a louse.
suffi cient unto the day is the evil there-
of  There is quite enough to worry about 
at the present time, without anticipating 
future problems and troubles: “In the 
meanwhile there were no sense in wor-
rying over schemes for a future, which 
we may not live to see. ‘Suffi cient for the 
day is the evil thereof’” (Jane Carlyle, 
letter dated April 1, 1836). The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “Take therefore no 
thought for the morrow: for the morrow 
shall take thought for the things of itself. 
Suffi cient unto the day is the evil thereof ” 
(Matthew 6:34).
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
don’t cross the bridge till you come 
to it; take things as they come.
the sun loses nothing by shining into a 
puddle  Those who are truly great cannot 
be corrupted by association with foul or 
wicked things or people: As Chaucer said, 
the Bible is no less holy for describing the worst 
sins of humankind—the sun loses nothing by 
shining into a puddle. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1303, but the senti-
ment it expresses is of ancient origin: the 
saying “the sun shines into dung but is not 
tainted” is attributed to the Greek philoso-
pher Diogenes (c. 412–c. 323 b.c.).
Variant of this proverb: the sun is not 
less bright for shining on a dunghill.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: he that touches pitch shall be 
defiled; if you lie down with dogs, 
you’ll get up with fleas.
sweep your own doorstep clean  Do 
not criticize others until you are beyond 
reproach yourself: You have no right to 
accuse them of wasting public money, when 
your own department is squandering huge 
amounts on needless bureaucracy—sweep your 
own doorstep clean! The proverb is fi rst 
recorded in T. Adams’s Temple (1624).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if every man would sweep his 
own doorstep the city would soon be 
clean; physician, heal thyself.
the sweetest wine makes the sharpest 
vinegar  See from the sweetest wine, 
the tartest vinegar.
success makes success as money makes money