257
the tailor makes the man  A person’s 
qualities may be judged by the clothes 
they wear: “Believe it, sir, that clothes do 
much upon the wit . . . and thence comes 
your proverb, the tailor makes the man” 
(Ben Jonson, The Staple of News, 1625). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1605 in 
William Shakespeare’s King Lear.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
clothes make the man.
take a hair of the dog that bit you 
Drinking more alcohol is supposed to be a 
cure for a hangover: “‘Rouse yourself, lion-
heart. Ha ha! Put a good face upon it, and 
drink again. Another hair of the dog that 
bit you, captain! . . .’ Mr Tappertit received 
these jovial promptings with a very bad 
grace, being much the worse, both in mind 
and body, for his two nights of debauch” 
(Charles Dickens, Barnaby Rudge, 1841). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546. It 
alludes to the former practice of treating a 
dog bite by putting a hair from the offend-
ing animal into the wound.
Variant of this proverb: the hair of 
the dog is good for the bite.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
like cures like.
take care of number one  Put your own 
interests before those of everybody else: 
My motto is “Take care of number one,” and I’m 
not going to risk losing my job for the sake of a 
hopeless cause. The proverb is fi rst recorded 
in Maria Edgeworth, The Parent’s Assistant 
(1796): “I’m only talking of number one, 
you know. I must take care of that fi rst.”
Variant of this proverb: look out for 
number one.
take care of the pennies and the dollars 
will take care of themselves  If you are 
careful with small sums of money, you will 
always have plenty—attend to the details 
of your fi nancial affairs and do not worry 
about the larger picture. Its original form 
has pence and pounds in place of pennies 
and dollars: “Take care of the pence and 
the pounds will take care of themselves 
is as true of personal habits as of money” 
(George Bernard Shaw, Pygmalion, 1912). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1750 in 
a letter written by Lord Chesterfi eld, in 
which it is attributed to “Old Mr. Lowndes 
[William Lowndes (1652–1724)], the 
famous Secretary of the Treasury.” In Alice’s 
Adventures in Wonderland (1865), Lewis Car-
roll punningly applied the proverb to 
language: “Take care of the sense, and the 
sounds will take care of themselves.”
Variant of this proverb: look after 
the pennies and the dollars will look after 
themselves.
t
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   257 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
258
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
light gains make heavy purses.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: penny wise and pound foolish.
take opportunity by the forelock  See 
take time by the forelock.
take the goods the gods provide  Make 
the most of anything you have or get by 
good fortune: If you have a natural talent 
for music, you should not feel guilty about 
using it to make money—take the goods 
the gods provide. In its current form, the 
proverb comes from John Dryden’s poem 
“Alexander’s Feast” (1697): “Lovely Thais 
sits beside thee,/Take the good the gods 
provide thee.” The sentiment it expresses, 
however, occurs in the writings of the 
Roman dramatist Plautus (c. 250–184 
b.c.): “habeas quod di dant boni [you may 
keep what good the gods give].”
take the will for the deed  We must 
always give people credit for their good 
intentions, even if they fail to carry them 
through: Take the will for the deed—she 
would have come to visit you at the hospital if 
there hadn’t been a railroad strike.
take things as they come  Sometimes it 
is best to deal with possible problems only 
as they arise: She decided to stop worrying 
about the future and just to take things as they 
came. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1611 in J. Davies’s The Scourge of Folly.
Variant of this proverb: take things as 
you fi nd them.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t cross the bridge till you come 
to it; don’t meet troubles halfway; 
sufficient unto the day is the evil 
thereof.
take time by the forelock  Take full 
advantage of the present, and do not 
waste time: “As his doing the one or the 
other was a mere question of time, he 
and Mrs. Pocket had taken Time by the 
forelock (when, to judge from its length, 
it would seem to have wanted cutting), 
and had married without the knowledge 
of the judicious parent” (Charles Dickens, 
Great Expectations, 1860–61). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in the 16th century. It 
alludes to a representation of Time as hav-
ing a bald head with just a lock of hair at 
the front, so it can be seized as it arrives 
but not as it departs.
Variant of this proverb: take oppor-
tunity by the forelock.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
the mill cannot grind with the water 
that is past; seize the day; there’s no 
time like the present; time and tide wait 
for no man.
a tale never loses in the telling  People 
are inclined to exaggerate, and anecdotes, 
gossip, or lies are embroidered by the teller 
each time they are retold: A tale never loses 
in the telling—he is rumored to have inherited 
twenty million dollars, but if you knock a couple 
of zeros off the end of the fi gure, you will be a 
bit closer to the actual sum of money involved. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in its cur-
rent form in 1721, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: a tale grows 
better in the telling.
talk about the devil and his imps will 
appear  See speak of the devil and he 
always appears.
talk is cheap  It is easy to say that 
something can or will be done, but it 
take opportunity by the forelock
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   258 1/29/07   5:13:01 PM
259
takes money or effort to do it; often used 
when people make idle boasts or prom-
ises they are unlikely to keep: “‘What 
can you do?’ ‘Go out to Montana, just 
as soon as the weather is fi t, and relo-
cate the mine. . . .’ ‘Talk is cheap, but it 
takes money to pay for railroad tickets,’ 
went on Malone” (Horatio Alger, Joe the 
Hotel Boy, 1906). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in its current form in 1843 (T. 
C. Haliburton, Attaché), but the senti-
ment it expresses is of earlier origin.
Variants of this proverb: talk is 
cheap, but it takes money to buy land; 
talk is cheap, but it takes money to buy 
liquor.
talk of the devil and he’s sure to 
appear  See speak of the devil and he 
always appears.
tastes differ  Different people like dif-
ferent things: “‘I express my opinion,’ 
retorted Neelie, chafi ng under the satiri-
cally indulgent tone in which the govern-
ess addressed her. ‘It’s a matter of taste, 
Miss Gwilt; and tastes differ’” (Wilkie 
Collins, Armadale, 1866). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1803.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every man to his taste; one man’s 
meat is another man’s poison; there’s 
no disputing about tastes.
tell it not in Gath  Be careful how much 
you tell your enemies: “The fact is—but 
tell it not in Gath—I was happier without 
them!” (Marie Corelli, God’s Good Man, 
1904). The proverb is biblical in origin, 
appearing at 2 Samuel 1:20, in which 
David hears of the death of Jonathan in 
battle with the Philistines: “Tell it not 
in Gath, publish it not in the streets of 
Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philis-
tines rejoice.”
tell not all you know, nor do all you 
can  It is good policy not to reveal the 
full extent of your knowledge or capa-
bilities: Sometimes it is wiser in business to 
tell not all you know, nor do all you can, but to 
keep something back for yourself. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1739 in Benjamin 
Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack.
tell the truth and shame the devil  It is 
always best to be honest, however great 
the temptation may be to lie: “I don’t like 
the whole change that’s come over you 
in the last year. I’m sorry if that hurts 
your feelings, but I’ve got to—tell the 
truth and shame the devil” (Thornton 
Wilder, Our Town, 1938). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1548. It occurs in 
Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, Part 1 (3:1): 
“And I can teach thee, coz, to shame 
the devil/By telling truth: tell truth and 
shame the devil.”
Variant of this proverb: speak the 
truth and shame the devil.
that government is best which governs 
least  The best form of government is 
one that allows people the greatest free-
dom: “I heartily accept the motto, ‘That 
government is best which governs least.’ 
. . . Carried out, it fi nally amounts to this, 
which also I believe—‘That government 
is best which governs not at all’” (Henry 
David Thoreau, Civil Disobedience, 1849). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1837, 
in John L. O’Sullivan’s introduction to 
The United States Magazine and Democratic 
Review: “The best government is that which 
governs least.” It is held to be one of the 
key principles of the Republican Party.
 that government is best which governs least
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   259 1/29/07   5:13:01 PM
260
them as asks, gits; them as don’t ask, 
don’t git  See ask, and it shall be given 
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and 
it shall be opened unto you.
there are as good fi sh in the sea as ever 
came out of it  See there are other fish 
in the sea.
there are lies, damned lies, and statis-
tics  Statistics can be used to create a 
misleading impression: “Statistically speak-
ing, this is one of the safest forms of travel.” 
“I don’t believe it. Have you never heard 
the saying ‘There are lies, damned lies, and 
statistics’?” The proverb is attributed to 
the British statesman Benjamin Disraeli 
(1804–81) in Mark Twain’s autobiogra-
phy: “There are three kinds of lies: lies, 
damned lies and statistics.”
there are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream  If one method 
fails, there are plenty more to choose 
from: Undeterred, we tried a more subtle 
approach—there are more ways of killing a 
cat than choking it with cream. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1855, in 
Charles Kingsley’s novel Westward Ho!, but 
its variant forms are of earlier origin.
Variants of this proverb: there are 
more ways of killing a dog than choking it 
with butter; there are more ways of kill-
ing a dog than hanging it.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: all roads lead to rome; there’s 
more than one way to skin a cat.
there are no birds in last year’s 
nest  Things are not as they were: That 
may well have been the case when you were in 
offi ce, but the circumstances are quite different 
now—there are no birds in last year’s nest, as 
they say. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1620, in a translation of Cervantes’ Don 
Quixote.
there are no gains without pains  See 
no pain, no gain.
there are none so blind as those who 
will not see  It is impossible to make 
people accept the evidence of their own 
eyes if they choose to ignore it or refuse 
to believe it: “‘None so blind as those that 
won’t see.’ . . . A single effort of the will 
was suffi cient to exclude from his view 
whatever he judged hostile to his immedi-
ate purpose” (Edward Fitzgerald, Polonius, 
1852). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1546 in the form “Who is so deaf, or so 
blind, as is he that willfully will neither 
hear nor see.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there are none so deaf as those who 
will not hear.
there are none so deaf as those who will 
not hear  You cannot communicate with 
people who stubbornly refuse to listen: 
I tried to warn her that her son was heading 
for trouble, but there are none so deaf as those 
who will not hear. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546, with different wording 
(see the preceding entry), but a French 
equivalent was in use 200 years earlier.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there are none so blind as those who 
will not see.
there are other fi sh in the sea  Plenty 
more people, things, opportunities, or 
options are available; often used to con-
sole somebody whose relationship with 
a boyfriend or girlfriend has ended: 
“There’s fi sh in the sea, no doubt of it, 
them as asks, gits; them as don’t ask, don’t git
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   260 1/29/07   5:13:01 PM
261
As good as ever came out of it” (W. S. 
Gilbert, Patience, 1881). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
c. 1573.
Variant of this proverb: there are 
as good fi sh in the sea as ever came out 
of it.
there are tricks in every trade  People 
in every occupation have their own spe-
cial—and often secret—ways of doing 
things that enable them to save time, 
effort, or money; often implying clever-
ness, craftiness, or deception: “‘Where 
are you staying?’ ‘Mrs. May’s boarding 
house.’ ‘I know her. What they tell is she 
fi lls you up with soup so you can’t eat 
much meat.’ ‘I guess there are tricks to 
every trade,’ said Adam” (John Steinbeck, 
East of Eden, 1952). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1632 in the form “Knavery 
in all trades.” It has given rise to the fi gu-
rative phrase the tricks of the trade.
there are two sides to every ques-
tion  Any issue can be looked at from 
two opposing viewpoints, both of which 
merit consideration: “Men of energy of 
character must have enemies: because 
there are two sides to every question, and 
. . . those who take the other will of course 
be hostile” (Thomas Jefferson, letter dated 
May 5, 1817). Of ancient origin, the 
proverb has been attributed to the Greek 
teacher Protagoras (c. 490–c. 420 b.c.). 
Other words may be used in place of ques-
tion, such as story, argument, coin, or fence.
there goes more to marriage than four 
bare legs in a bed  There is more to 
marriage tha n sex: The most successful mar-
riages are those where the husband and wife 
are intellectually as well as sexually compat-
ible—there goes more to marriage than four 
bare legs in a bed. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1549 in John Heywood’s Dia-
logue of Proverbs.
there’ll be sleeping enough in the 
grave  Life is too short to waste time 
having more sleep than you need: She was 
one of those hearty outdoor types who insist on 
waking everybody up at the crack of dawn with 
a cry of “Rise and shine! There’ll be sleeping 
enough in the grave.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1741, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
there must be a fi rst time for every-
thing  See there’s a first time for 
everything.
there’s a black sheep in every fl ock  In 
every family, community, organization, or 
profession there is at least one member 
who brings disgrace on the rest: “There 
are black sheep in nearly every large fam-
ily . . . and these two one-idea’d curs were 
ready to tear any one to death that should 
interfere with that miserable inheritance 
which was their thought by day and their 
dream by night” (Charles Reade, The Clois-
ter and the Hearth, 1861). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1816. Often reduced to 
the cliché a black sheep, or the black sheep of 
the family, it alludes to the undesirability 
of sheep with black wool that is diffi cult 
to dye.
Variant of this proverb: there’s a 
black sheep in every family.
there’s a fi rst time for everything  Ev-
erything must start somewhere, and the 
fact that something has not happened 
before does not mean that it will never 
happen; also used when somebody does 
 there’s a fi rst time for everything
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   261 1/29/07   5:13:01 PM
262
something that he or she has never done 
before: “It’s perfectly safe—we’ve been doing 
it this way for the past ten years and we’ve 
never had an accident.” “There’s a fi rst time for 
everything.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1792 in A. Hamilton’s Papers.
Variants of this proverb: there’s 
always a fi rst time; there must be a fi rst 
time for everything.
there’s a Jack for every Jill  See every 
jack has his jill.
there’s always a fi rst time  See there’s 
a first time for everything.
there’s always room at the top  Those 
who excel, or who are truly ambitious, 
will always succeed: It’s a competitive business, 
but there’s always room at the top. The proverb 
is attributed to the U.S. statesman Daniel 
Webster (1782–1852), who replied in 
this way to advise against joining the over-
crowded legal profession. It was popular-
ized in the mid-20th century by the British 
writer John Braine in his best-selling novel 
Room at the Top (1957) and its Academy 
Award–winning movie adaptation.
there’s an exception to every rule  No 
rule applies in every single case: This 
phenomenon, which appears to defy the laws of 
physics, demonstrates that there’s an exception to 
every rule. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1579 in the form “There is no rule so 
general that it admits not exception.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the exception proves the rule.
there’s a pot of gold at the end of 
the rainbow  Some things can never be 
achieved; used when people chase after 
ideals or ambitions that constantly elude 
them: There’s a pot of gold at the end of the 
rainbow, and in this case the pot of gold is the 
crime-free society that no politician will ever 
be able to deliver. The proverb alludes to 
the popular superstition, fi rst recorded 
in 1836, that a pot of gold is to be found 
at the place where a rainbow touches the 
ground.
there’s a remedy for everything except 
death  Death is fi nal, irremediable, and 
inevitable; also used to imply that all 
other problems have a solution: “There 
is a remedy for everything except Death 
. . . so the bitterness of this disappoint-
ment has long passed away” (Frederick 
Locker-Lampson, My Confi dences, 1896). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1573, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: there’s a 
remedy for all things but death.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
death defies the doctor.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: avoidance is the only remedy.
there’s a season and a time for every pur-
pose under the heaven  See to every-
thing there is a season.
there’s a sin of omission as well as of 
commission  There are times when fail-
ure to do what you should is as bad as doing 
what you should not do: As he did nothing to 
prevent the burglars from entering the building, 
he was deemed to have helped them—there’s a 
sin of omission as well as of commission.
there’s a skeleton in every closet  Every 
person, family, or organization has a shame-
ful secret: There’s a skeleton in every closet, 
and he was one of those journalists who special-
there’s a Jack for every Jill
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   262 1/29/07   5:13:01 PM
263
ize in fl inging open the closet doors of the rich 
and famous and exposing their skeletons to the 
public eye. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1845 (in William Thackeray’s Punch in 
the East) in the form “There is a skeleton 
in every house.” It is often reduced to the 
cliché a skeleton in the closet. 
Variant of this proverb: every family 
has a skeleton in the closet.
there’s a sucker born every minute  The 
world is full of gullible people: “‘There’s a 
sucker born every minute,’/P. T. Barnum 
declared,/And a con man is born every 
hour/To make sure no sucker is spared” 
(Wall Street Journal, 1994). The proverb is 
attributed to the U.S. showman Phineas 
T. Barnum (1810–91), but there is no 
evidence to support this attribution. It 
sometimes occurs in the allusive form 
“There’s one born every minute,” which is 
also applied more generally to fools.
there’s a tide in the affairs of man  In 
the ebb and fl ow of human existence, it 
is important to act at the most opportune 
or favorable time, and not to miss this 
moment when it comes: “‘There is a tide 
in the affairs of men/Which, taken at the 
fl ood,’—you know the rest,/And most of 
us have found it now and then;/At least we 
think so, though but few have guess’d/The 
moment, till too late to come again (Lord 
Byron, “Don Juan,” 1819). The proverb is 
a shortened and allusive form of a passage 
from Shakespeare’s play Julius Caesar (4:3): 
“There is a time in the affairs of men/
Which, taken at the fl ood, leads on to for-
tune; /Omitted, all the voyage of their life 
/Is bound in shallows and in miseries.”
there’s a time and place for every-
thing  Things should be done only at the 
appropriate time and in the appropriate 
place: There’s a time and place for everything, 
and this is neither the time nor the place to 
be cracking jokes like that! The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1509 in A. Barclay, Ship 
of Fools.
Variant of this proverb: there’s a 
time for everything.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
to everything there is a season.
there’s a time to speak and a time to be 
silent  Sometimes it is not appropriate to 
say anything: She could have told him where 
he had gone wrong, but there is a time to speak, 
and a time to be silent. The proverb is of bib-
lical origin, appearing at Ecclesiastes 3:7.
Variant of this proverb: there’s a 
time to wink as well as to see.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: silence is golden; speech is silver, 
but silence is golden; think before you 
speak; a word spoken is past recalling.
there’s good and bad in every-
thing  Nothing is totally good or bad: 
If you’re hoping to fi nd the perfect job, you’re 
heading for disappointment—there’s good and 
bad in everything.
there’s honor among thieves  Criminals 
will not hurt or betray their fellow crimi-
nals, thus treating one another with more 
respect than their victims: If it’s true that 
there’s honor among thieves, then why do the 
prisoners want to keep their personal pos-
sessions under lock and key? The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in the 
early 19th century, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: dog does not eat dog; hawks will 
not pick out hawks’ eyes.
 there’s honor among thieves
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   263 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
264
there’s luck in leisure  It is better not 
to act in haste; sometimes used to justify 
procrastination: They say there’s luck in 
leisure, so I decided to wait a little longer. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1683 
in G. Meriton’s Yorkshire Dialogue.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: delays are dangerous.
there’s luck in odd numbers  According 
to popular superstition, odd numbers are 
lucky; often said when somebody does 
something for the third, fi fth, or seventh 
time: “‘Now, Rory, leave off, sir: you’ll 
hug me no more;/That’s eight times 
to-day that you’ve kissed me before.’/
‘Then here goes another,’ says he, ‘to 
make sure,/For there’s luck in odd num-
bers,’ says Rory O’More” (Samuel Lover, 
“Rory O’More,” 1836). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in Shakespeare’s play The 
Merry Wives of Windsor (c. 1598). The 
sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
ancient origin, occurring in the writings 
of Virgil (70–19 b.c.): numero deus impare 
gaudet [the god delights in an uneven 
number].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the third time is the charm.
there’s many a good cock come out of 
a tattered bag  Do not be misled by 
external appearances—it is what is inside 
or what emerges from something that 
counts; also used to imply that people 
should not be judged by their parents, 
clothes, or background: The classes take 
place in a dilapidated building on the wrong 
side of town, but they have produced some of 
the fi nest musicians in the county, proving that 
there’s many a good cock come out of a tattered 
bag. First recorded in 1883, the proverb 
comes from the sport of cockfi ghting.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t judge a book by its cover.
there’s many a good tune played on an 
old fi ddle  Old people should not be 
dismissed as incapable: “Beyond a haricot 
vein in one of my legs I’m as young as ever 
I was. Old indeed! There’s many a good 
tune played on an old fi ddle” (Samuel 
Butler, The Way of All Flesh, 1903). The 
quotation is the fi rst recorded use of the 
proverb.
there’s many a slip between cup and 
lip  Many things can go wrong in the 
process of putting a plan into action; often 
used to warn against overconfi dence or 
overoptimism: We can’t be certain of success, 
and I won’t be happy until I have the document 
in my hand—there’s many a slip between cup 
and lip. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in En glish in 1539, but the sentiment it 
expresses dates back to ancient times. It 
is said to have its origin in Greek mythol-
ogy, in the story of a man who laughed at 
a prophecy that he would not live to drink 
the wine of his vineyard. As he raised the 
fi rst glass to his lips he was told that a boar 
was destroying his vines; he put down the 
glass and rushed out, only to be killed by 
the boar.
Variant of this proverb: there’s many 
a slip ’twixt cup and lip.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t count your chickens before 
they are hatched.
there’s many a true word said in jest  See 
many a true word is spoken in jest.
there’s measure in all things  Every-
thing should be done in moderation: 
“‘Why, carry out logically the theory you 
there’s luck in leisure
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   264 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
265
were advocating just now, and it follows 
that people may be killed.’ ‘Upon my 
word!’ cried Luzhin. ‘No, that’s not so,’ 
put in Zossimov. . . . ‘There’s a measure in 
all things,’ Luzhin went on superciliously. 
‘Economic ideas are not an incitement 
to murder, and one has but to suppose’” 
(Fyodor Dostoevsky, Crime and Punishment, 
1866). The proverb is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the writings of the Roman 
poet Horace (65–8 b.c.): “est modus in 
rebus [there is measure in things].” It was 
fi rst recorded in English in Chaucer’s Troi-
lus and Criseyde (c. 1385): “In every thyng, 
I woot, there lith mesure.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: enough is as good as a feast; 
enough is enough; moderation in all 
things.
there’s more than one way to skin a 
cat  There are many different ways of 
doing something: “The door’s locked! Now 
what are we going to do?” “There’s more than 
one way to skin a cat—let’s see if we can 
fi nd an open window.” The proverb is fi rst 
recorded in John Ray’s A Collection of Eng-
lish Proverbs (1670).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: all roads lead to rome; there 
are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream.
there’s no accounting for tastes  Ev-
erybody likes different things; often said 
disparagingly of another person’s choice, 
or predilection: “‘Shall we try another 
fi gure of the Lobster Quadrille?’ the Gry-
phon went on. ‘Or would you like the 
Mock Turtle to sing you a song?’ ‘Oh, a 
song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be 
so kind,’ Alice replied, so eagerly that the 
Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone, 
‘Hm! No accounting for tastes!’” (Lewis 
Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, 
1865). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1794.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: one man’s meat is another man’s 
poison.
there’s no disputing about tastes  There 
is no point in arguing about what is good 
or bad, since everybody likes different 
things: I tried to persuade her to choose a 
bolder color, but I soon realized I was wasting 
my breath. There’s no disputing about tastes, 
and she likes pastel shades best. Of ancient 
origin, the proverb is sometimes quoted 
in its Latin form, “De gustibus non est 
disputandum.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
tastes differ.
there’s no fool like an old fool  Foolish 
behavior in old people is often worse 
than that in the young: “‘You’re an old 
woman, Emily, and there’s no fool like an 
old fool. The man’s twenty years younger 
than you, and don’t fool yourself as 
to what he married you for. Money!” 
(Agatha Christie, The Mysterious Affair 
at Styles, 1920). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546 in John Heywood’s 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: an old fool is 
the worst fool.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a fool at forty is a fool indeed.
there’s no great loss without some 
gain  There is often a small advantage 
to be gained from an unfortunate or 
unpleasant occurrence: My dreams of join-
ing the diplomatic corps had been dashed, but 
there’s no great loss without some gain, and I 
 there’s no great loss without some gain
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   265 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
266
had made a number of useful contacts along 
the way. The proverb dates from before 
1641.
there’s no little enemy  Do no under-
estimate your enemies, all of whom are 
capable of great harm: “To be friendly 
with every one is another matter; we must 
remember that there is no little enemy” 
(Sir John Lubbock, The Pleasures of Life, 
1887). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1659, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
ancient origin: compare Publilius Syrus 
(fi rst century b.c.), “Inimicum, quamvis 
humilem, docti est metuere [It is a wise man 
who fears an enemy, however humble].”
there’s no peace for the wicked  Life is 
full of interruptions and disturbances; said 
by those who are bothered in this way, joc-
ularly implying that they do not deserve 
to have any time to themselves: The phone 
hasn’t stopped ringing this evening—there’s no 
peace for the wicked! The proverb is of bibli-
cal origin: “There is no peace, saith the 
Lord, unto the wicked” (Isaiah 48:22).
Variant of this proverb: there’s no 
rest for the wicked.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s no rest for the weary.
there’s no place like home  Home is the 
place where people feel most comfortable 
and contented; often said by somebody 
on his or her return: “They . . . were only 
come now to stay a few weeks on account 
of their father’s death; but they did so 
like Marsh End and Morton, and all these 
moors and hills about. They had been in 
London, and many other grand towns; 
but they always said there was no place 
like home” (Charlotte Brontë, Jane Eyre, 
1847). The proverb is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the Greek poet Hesiod’s 
Works and Days (eighth century b.c.). 
It was popularized in the song “Home, 
Sweet Home” (1823) by J. H. Payne: 
“’Mid pleasures and palaces though we 
may roam,/Be it ever so humble, there’s 
no place like home.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: east, west, home’s best; home is 
home, be it ever so homely.
there’s no pleasure without pain  A 
happy or enjoyable experience is always 
accompanied by some sorrow or suffer-
ing: There’s no pleasure without pain, and 
the joy of our reunion was tempered by the 
knowledge that this was the last time the whole 
family would be together. The fi rst recorded 
use of this proverb is c. 1526: “Lyghtly 
there is no pleasure, but that vnto it some 
peyne is annexed” (Dicta Sapientum).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: no joy without annoy; there’s no 
rose without a thorn.
there’s no putting old heads on young 
shoulders  See you can’t put an old 
head on young shoulders.
there’s no rest for the weary  However 
hard you work, and however tired you 
are, there is always more to be done; said 
resignedly by somebody who suffers in 
this way: I’d just sat down, for the fi rst time 
all day, when my son called me into the kitchen 
to help him with a cake he was baking for his 
girlfriend—there’s no rest for the weary! The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in B. Graeme’s 
Murder of Some Importance (1931).
Variant of this proverb: there’s no 
rest for the wicked.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s no peace for the wicked.
there’s no little enemy
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   266 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
267
there’s no rest for the wicked  See 
there’s no peace for the wicked; 
there’s no rest for the weary.
there’s no rose without a thorn  All 
good, beautiful, or pleasurable things have 
some drawback or unpleasant aspect: “‘My 
pay is to be twenty-fi ve louis a month, a 
good table, good lodging, etc., etc. . . . Do 
you think it is worth the trouble?’ ‘There’s 
no rose without a thorn’” (Casanova, 
Memoirs, 1828–38). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1435, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of ancient origin.
Variant of this proverb: every rose 
has a thorn.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: no joy without alloy; there’s no 
pleasure without pain; you have to 
take the bitter with the sweet.
there’s no royal road to learning 
Knowledge and skills can only be 
acquired by hard work—there are no 
short cuts: There is no royal road to learn-
ing, but those who are prepared to put in 
the months of study required to master this 
subject will find their efforts well rewarded. 
The proverb was first recorded in its 
current form in 1824. It comes from 
an anecdote about the Greek math-
ematician Euclid (fl. 300 b.c.), who 
allegedly replied, “There is no royal 
road to geometry,” when asked by King 
Ptolemy I for an easier way to study 
the subject.
there’s no smoke without fi re  Rumors 
usually have a factual basis, although 
they may present a misleading or exag-
gerated version of the truth: The company 
has released a statement refuting the allega-
tions of fi nancial mismanagement made in 
yesterday’s newspapers, but there’s no smoke 
without fi re, and its stockholders remain con-
cerned. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1592, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin. Compare 
the 13th-century French proverb “Nul 
feu est sens fumee ne fumee sens feu [No fi re 
is without smoke, nor smoke without 
fi re].
Variant of this proverb: where there’s 
smoke, there’s fi re.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: common fame is seldom to blame; 
what everybody says must be true.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: much smoke, little fire.
there’s no such thing as a free lunch  Ev-
erything must be paid for, sooner or later, 
directly or indirectly: “Europeans are now 
learning some hard facts of life about 
socialized medicine: There’s no such thing 
as a free lunch” (Washington Times, 1996). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1966, 
in Robert Heinlein’s The Moon Is a Harsh 
Mistress. It is associated with the U.S. 
economist Milton Friedman (1912–  ), 
who popularized it.
Variant of this proverb: there’s no 
such thing as a free ride.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you don’t get something for nothing.
there’s no such thing as bad weather, 
only the wrong clothes  Any weather is 
tolerable if you are suitably dressed for it: 
“There’s no such thing as bad weather, only the 
wrong clothes,” she said as she put on her slicker, 
boots, and sou’wester and set off in the pour-
ing rain for her daily walk with the dogs. The 
proverb is of comparatively recent origin, 
and was fi rst recorded in the Washington 
Post (Feb. 15, 1980).
 there’s no such thing as bad weather, only the wrong clothes
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   267 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
268
Variant of this proverb: there’s no such 
thing as bad weather, only bad clothes.
there’s nothing constant but inconstancy 
There will always be people and things 
that are unreliable or changeable: There’s 
nothing constant but inconstancy, and even our 
best friends may turn against us. The proverb 
is recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
there’s nothing lost by civility  Polite-
ness does no harm, and may do a lot of 
good: You could at least have apologized—
there’s nothing lost by civility.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
civility costs nothing.
there’s nothing new under the sun  What 
is thought to be a novelty is often shown 
to be nothing more than a revival or 
reintroduction of an old idea; also used 
as a comment on the changeless nature 
of things: “‘They’re after something quite 
new—something that’s never been heard 
of before.’ ‘My dear fellow! There is noth-
ing new under the sun’” (George Orwell, 
Coming up for Air, 1939). The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “The thing that hath 
been, it is that which shall be; and that 
which is done is that which shall be done: 
and there is no new thing under the sun” 
(Ecclesiastes 1:9).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: everything old is new again; the 
more things change, the more they 
stay the same.
there’s nothing so good for the inside of 
a man as the outside of a horse  Riding 
is a healthy pastime: “The Squire will wind 
up . . . with an apocryphal saying which he 
attributes to Lord Palmerston—‘There’s 
nothing so good for the inside of a man as 
the outside of a horse’” (G. W. E. Russell, 
Social Silhouettes, 1906). The quotation is 
the fi rst recorded use of the proverb.
there’s no time like the present  Now 
is the best time to do something; used 
as encouragement to act without delay: 
“We must clear out the attic one of these days.” 
“There’s no time like the present—let’s make a 
start on it straight away.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1696, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: take time by the forelock; pro-
crastination is the thief of time.
there’s nowt so queer as folk  People 
are uniquely unpredictable: He shook his 
head when he heard the news and observed 
“There’s nowt so queer as folk.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1905 in the English 
Dialect Dictionary.
there’s one law for the rich and another 
for the poor  See one law for the rich 
and another for the poor.
there’s reason in all things  Everything is 
logical or done for a purpose: They say there’s 
reason in all things, but I have yet to understand 
the reason for this drastic change of plan. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1602 in John 
Marston’s Antonio and Mellida.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every why hath its wherfore.
there’s safety in numbers  It is preferable 
or advisable to face a dangerous or unpleas-
ant situation in the company of others; also 
used more generally, to imply that many is 
better than a few, or to justify siding with 
the majority: We always walk home from the 
there’s nothing constant but inconstancy
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   268 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
269
club together, on the principle that there’s safety 
in numbers. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“Where no counsel is, the people fall: but 
in the multitude of counselors there is 
safety” (Proverbs 11:14).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every why has its wherefore.
there’s truth in wine  What people say 
when they are drunk is usually true: There 
is truth in wine, and she had drunk the best part 
of a bottle of champagne, so I felt inclined to 
believe her. Of ancient origin, the proverb is 
often used in its Latin form, “In vino veritas,” 
as in the following quotation from Anthony 
Trollope’s novel Phineas Redux (1873): “But 
he was fl ushed with much wine, and he 
was a man whose arrogance in that con-
dition was apt to become extreme. ‘In 
vino veritas!’ The sober devil can hide his 
cloven hoof; but when the devil drinks he 
loses his cunning and grows honest.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
alcohol will preserve anything but 
a secret; drunkenness reveals what 
soberness conceals.
Variant of this proverb: in wine there 
is truth.
they also serve who only stand and 
wait  You can be often be helpful without 
actively doing anything; also used to com-
mend or encourage patience and endur-
ance: “This man’s life of patient suffering 
was not in vain, but a benediction to many 
who came in contact with it. ‘Those also 
serve who only stand and wait’” (Philip 
Schaff, History of the Christian Church, 1883–
1893). The proverb comes from John Mil-
ton’s poem “On His Blindness” (c. 1650).
they that dance must pay the piper 
Those who gain pleasure or benefi t from 
something must be prepared to bear 
the costs or suffer the consequences: 
He smoked and drank himself into an early 
grave—they that dance must pay the piper. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1638 
(J. Taylor, Taylor’s Feast) in the form “Those 
that dance must pay the Musicke.”
Variants of this proverb: he who 
dances must pay the fi ddler; those who 
dance must pay the fi ddler.
they that live longest see most  Older 
people have more experience of life: 
Many of her younger neighbors used to go 
to my grandmother for advice, on the basis 
of the saying “They that live longest see 
most.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1620, in a translation of 
Cervantes’s Don Quixote, but there is 
evidence of a French version in the early 
14th century.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t teach your grandmother to 
suck eggs.
they that sow the wind shall reap the 
whirlwind  People who provoke trouble 
or violence—or behave in a reckless man-
ner—will suffer far worse consequences: 
“. . . the indiscriminate profusion that 
would glut avarice, or supply prodigal-
ity, neither does good, nor is rewarded 
by gratitude. It is sowing the wind to 
reap the whirlwind” (Sir Walter Scott, 
The Black Dwarf, 1816). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “For they have sown the 
wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind” 
(Hosea 8:7).
Variant of this proverb: sow the wind 
and reap the whirlwind.
a thing of beauty is a joy forever  Beau-
tiful things bring lasting pleasure; often used 
 a thing of beauty is a joy forever
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   269 1/29/07   5:13:03 PM
270
to imply that the memory of  something 
beautiful stays with you for a long time 
afterward: “I wished for a picture of her. A 
Madonna, whose face was a portrait of that 
beautiful Nazareth girl, would be a ‘thing 
of beauty’ and ‘a joy forever’” (Mark Twain, 
The Innocents Abroad, 1869). The proverb 
comes from John Keats’s poem “Endymion” 
(1818): “A thing of beauty is a joy for ever:/
Its loveliness increases; it will never/Pass 
into nothingness.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: beauty is but a blossom.
things come in threes  According to 
popular superstition, two similar occur-
rences—bad or good—are inevitably fol-
lowed by a third: I fell down the steps this 
morning and trapped my fi nger in the door 
this afternoon, so if things come in threes—as 
people say they do—I’m in for another acci-
dent before long. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1927.
Variants of this proverb: all good 
things come in threes; all bad things come 
in threes.
things past cannot be recalled  It is 
too late for regret after something is done; 
sometimes used to advise caution: Many 
of us would do things differently if we had our 
lives to live over again, but things past cannot 
be recalled. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in the 15th century, but there 
is evidence of a French version 100 years 
earlier.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what’s done cannot be undone.
a thing you don’t want is dear at any 
price  Do not be tempted to buy some-
thing you do not need just because it is 
cheap: When my mother came back from the 
sale laden with so-called bargains, I reminded 
her of the saying “A thing you don’t want is 
dear at any price.”
think all you speak, but speak not all you 
think  Do not say anything that you do 
not believe, but never say everything that 
is in your mind: I’m not asking you to lie, I’m 
just suggesting that it would be not be tactful 
to tell the whole truth—think all you speak, 
but speak not all you think. The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
think before you speak  Never express 
an opinion, make a remark, or answer a 
question until you have considered the 
possible effects of what you are going 
to say; also used to imply that careful 
thought beforehand leads to more elo-
quent speech: “A long article on airport-
security tips for passengers ends with the 
advice: ‘Think before you speak. Casual 
joking remarks may not be viewed as such 
by secret agents’” (Boston Globe, 1990). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1557 in 
the form “Think well and you will speak 
well.”
Variants of this proverb: fi rst think, 
and then speak; think fi rst and speak after-
ward; think twice before you speak once.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: think much, speak little, and write 
less; a word spoken is past recalling.
thinking is very far from knowing 
Opinion and conjecture are not the 
same as knowledge and certainty: “I 
think this is the right road.” “Thinking is 
very far from knowing—let’s look at the 
map!” The proverb was first recorded in 
1706 in J. Stevens, A New Spanish and 
English Dictionary.
things come in threes
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   270 1/29/07   5:13:03 PM
271
think much, speak little, and write less 
It is best to think long and hard about 
something before expressing any thoughts 
about it. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1430 in John Lydate’s Minor Poems in the 
form: “Take no quarelle, thynk mekyl and 
say nought.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
think before you speak.
think twice before you speak once  See 
think before you speak.
the third time is the charm  According 
to popular superstition, success will come 
at the third attempt: After two aborted mis-
sions, N.A.S.A. is hoping that the third time is 
the charm. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1721 (James Kelly, Scottish Proverbs), 
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Variants of this proverb: third time 
lucky; the third time pays for all.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if at first you don’t succeed, 
try, try again; there’s luck in odd 
numbers.
this, too, shall pass  Do not despair—an 
unpleasant situation or a diffi cult period 
will not last forever: When things were going 
badly for me, in the early part of my career, my 
father consoled me with the saying “This, too, 
shall pass.” He was right, of course, and soon 
the bad times were nothing more than a fading 
memory. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1852. In a speech in 1859, Abraham Lin-
coln told a story about its origin: “It is said 
an Eastern monarch once charged his wise 
men to invent him a sentence . . . which 
should be true and appropriate in all times 
and situations. They presented him the 
words: ‘And this, too, shall pass away.’” A 
similar anecdote attributes the proverb to 
King Solomon.
Variant of this proverb: all things 
will pass.
those who can, do; those who can’t, 
teach  People who are incapable of put-
ting their knowledge and skills to practi-
cal use go into education: He graduated 
from law school in 1995 and went back there 
as a lecturer two years later, prompting his 
students to remark, “Those who can, do; those 
who can’t, teach.” The proverb comes from 
George Bernard Shaw’s Man and Superman 
(1903): “He who can does. He who can-
not, teaches.” Other words may be substi-
tuted for teach, as in “Those who can, do; 
those who can’t, attend conferences.”
those who cannot remember the past 
are condemned to repeat it  Those who 
forget, are ignorant of, or fail to learn 
from the mistakes of earlier generations 
are likely to make the same mistakes 
themselves: It is to be hoped that the study 
of modern history in our schools and colleges 
will prevent a recurrence of horrors such as the 
Holocaust of World War II—those who cannot 
remember the past are condemned to repeat it. 
In its current form, the proverb comes 
from George Santayana’s The Life of Reason 
(1905–06). The sentiment it expresses, 
however, is of ancient origin.
those who dance must pay the fi d-
dler  See they that dance must pay 
the piper.
those who hide can fi nd  The person 
who fi nds something is often the person 
who hid it in the fi rst place: The speed with 
which the discovery was made aroused suspi-
cions that the police had planted the drugs on 
 those who hide can fi nd
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   271 1/29/07   5:13:03 PM
272
the premises—those who hide can fi nd. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1400 in 
Seven Sages of Rome.
those who know don’t speak; those who 
speak don’t know  Those who talk the 
most volubly are usually those who know 
the least about the subject in question: 
The more you say, the more you show your 
ignorance—have you never heard the proverb 
“Those who know don’t speak and those who 
speak don’t know”? Of ancient Chinese 
origin, the proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English in 1948.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
who knows most, speaks least.
those who play at bowls must look out 
for rubbers  It is foolish to embark on 
or participate in an enterprise without 
being aware of or taking account of the 
problems you may encounter: “‘And how 
if it fails?’ said Darsie. ‘Thereafter as it 
may be . . . those who play at bowls must 
meet with rubbers’” (Sir Walter Scott, 
Redgauntlet, 1824). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1762. The word rubbers (or 
rubs) refers to the unevenness of the 
ground on which the game of bowls (or 
lawn bowling) is played.
those who please everybody please 
nobody  See you can’t please every-
body.
thought is free  Anybody may think 
whatever he or she likes: “‘Ah, your 
Ursel was a jewel of worth,’ said the girl 
earnestly. ‘Would she were here.’ ‘Instead 
of her that is here?’ ‘I say not that,’ and 
she blushed a little. ‘You do but think 
it.’ ‘Thought is free’” (Charles Reade, 
The Cloister and the Hearth, 1861). First 
recorded c. 1390, the proverb occurs 
in Shakespeare’s play Twelfth Night (1:3; 
1601): “‘Fair lady, do you think you have 
fools in hand?’ ‘Now, sir, thought is free.’”
the thread breaks where it is weakest  A 
weak point in a thread or anything else is 
likely to be the point where the whole 
thing fails: He insisted upon changes in lower 
management, arguing that the thread breaks 
where it is weakest. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1640 in George Herbert’s 
Outlandish Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a chain is no stronger than its weak-
est link.
threatened men live long  Threats are 
often not carried out, and people who have 
been warned are on their guard and there-
fore in less danger than others; sometimes 
said in defi ant response to a threat or warn-
ing: A succession of doctors had told him that if 
he didn’t change his lifestyle, he wouldn’t live to 
see his grandchildren, but threatened folks live 
long, and he proved them all wrong. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in English in 1534 
(Lady E. Wheathell, in M. St. C. Byrne, 
Lisle Letters), but with the implication that 
it was already an old saying, and a French 
equivalent was in use 200 years earlier.
Variant of this proverb: threatened 
folks live the longest.
the three doctors Diet, Quiet, and Tem-
perance are the best physicians  See 
the best doctors are dr. diet, dr. 
quiet, and dr. merryman.
three may keep a secret, if two of them 
are dead  It is impossible for two or 
more people to keep a secret: “Don’t worry, 
your secret is safe with us.” “I wish I could 
those who know don’t speak; those who speak don’t know
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   272 1/29/07   5:13:03 PM
273
believe you, but I’ve heard it said that three 
may keep a secret only if two of them are dead.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in 
John Heywood, Dialogue of Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: two can keep 
a secret if one is dead.
three moves are as bad as a fi re  The 
loss, damage, and stress involved in mov-
ing house three times is equivalent to that 
caused by a fi re: I can well believe that three 
moves are as bad as a fi re—we have already 
moved house twice since we were married, and 
it was a major upheaval each time, so I hope 
we never have to do it again. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1758, in Benjamin 
Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Variant of this proverb: moving three 
times is as bad as a fi re.
three things are not to be trusted: a 
cow’s horn, a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s 
hoof  A cow is likely to gore you, a 
dog to bite you, and a horse to kick you, 
so treat all three with respect and cau-
tion: Given that three things are not to be 
trusted—a cow’s hoof, a dog’s tooth, and a 
horse’s hoof—is it any surprise that people 
prefer to live in cities and keep cats? The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in English c. 1383, 
with woman’s faith as the third object of 
distrust, replacing a cow’s horn. Other 
substitutes include women’s protestations, an 
Englishman’s laugh, and a baby’s bottom, the 
last of these occurring in a 13th-century 
French version of the proverb.
three times a bridesmaid, never a 
bride  See always a bridesmaid, never 
a bride.
thrift is a great revenue  Saving and 
frugality lead to fi nancial gain: “Thrift 
. . . is not only a great virtue but also 
‘a great revenue’” (London Times, 1930). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, with 
different wording, in 1659, but the sen-
timent it expresses is of ancient origin. 
Compare Cicero (106–43 b.c.): “Non 
intelligunt homines quam magnum vectigal 
sit parsimonia [Men do no realize how 
great a revenue thrift is].”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a penny saved is a penny earned; 
saving is getting.
throw dirt enough, and some will 
stick  A reputation that is constantly 
attacked cannot remain undamaged—if 
false accusations or defamatory remarks 
are repeated often enough, people will 
begin to believe them: “Whatever harm 
a . . . venomous tongue could do them, 
he took care should be done. Only throw 
dirt enough and some of it is sure to stick” 
(Thomas Hughes, Tom Brown’s Schooldays, 
1857). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1656 in Trepan.
Variant of this proverb: fl ing dirt 
enough, and some will stick.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
give a dog a bad name and hang him.
throw out a sprat to catch a mackerel 
It is worth making a small sacrifi ce to 
gain something of much greater value: 
Loss leaders are goods offered for sale at below 
cost price to attract customers who will, it is 
hoped, make further purchases in the store—a 
modern illustration of the saying “Throw out 
a sprat to catch a mackerel.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1810 in John Poole, 
Hamlet Travestied.
Variants of this proverb: you must 
lose a fl y to catch a trout; set a sprat to 
catch a mackerel.
 throw out a sprat to catch a mackerel
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   273 1/29/07   5:13:03 PM
274
Thursday’s child has far to go  Chil-
dren born on a Thursday are supposed 
to be destined to travel: We were not sur-
prised when Megan announced her intention 
to backpack around the world before going 
to college—she was born on a Thursday, and 
everybody knows that Thursday’s child has far 
to go! The proverb is the fourth line of a 
traditional rhyme. See entries at the days 
of the week for other proverbs from this 
rhyme.
time alone will tell  See time will tell.
time and tide wait for no man  Nobody 
can afford to delay or be delayed: “‘Annie, 
my dear,’ said he, looking at his watch, and 
fi lling his glass, ‘it is past your cousin Jack’s 
time, and we must not detain him, since 
time and tide—both concerned in this 
case—wait for no man’” (Charles Dickens, 
David Copperfi eld, 1850). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1592 in a form referring 
to both time and tide, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
take time by the forelock.
time ends all things  Everything must 
ultimately come to an end—nothing lasts 
forever: Time ends all things, and the feuding 
families fi nally agreed to bury their differences. 
The proverb is fi rst recorded in N. Ames’s 
Almanacs (1786).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
everything has an end.
time fl ies  Time sometimes seems to 
pass with surprising rapidity: “‘Time fl ies,’ 
said Dick. ‘George Thorne will be free 
before long, and he’ll be coming out. I 
wonder if he’ll stay here or try to take 
Mercedes away?’ ” (Zane Grey, Desert Gold, 
1913). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1639, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of ancient origin. It is some-
times found in its Latin form, “Tempus 
fugit.” Extended forms of the proverb 
include “Time fl ies when you’re having 
fun” and “Time fl ies when you’re enjoying 
yourself,” often used ironically.
time hangs heavy on idle hands  Time 
seems to pass more slowly when we have 
little or nothing to do: Business is sluggish 
at the moment, and the working day sometimes 
seems interminable—time hangs heavy on 
idle hands. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
time is a great healer  Grief, shock, 
wounded feelings, and so on will fade with 
time: She thought she would never get over the 
death of her husband, but time is a great healer. 
The proverb is of ancient origin, occurring 
in the writings of the Greek poet and dra-
matist Menander (c. 342–292 b.c.): “time 
is the healer of all necessary evils.”
Variants of this proverb: time heals 
all wounds; time will heal.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: patience is a remedy for every 
sorrow; time works wonders.
time is money   Nobody can afford to 
waste time that could be spent earning 
money: “I’m only asking for ten minutes of 
your time—it won’t cost you anything.” “Yes it 
will—I’m self-employed, and time is money!” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1748, in Benjamin Franklin’s Advice 
to a Young Tradesman, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
time is the rider that breaks youth 
Young people become less wild and more 
Thursday’s child has far to go
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   274 1/29/07   5:13:04 PM
275
sensible with age: Most troublesome teenag-
ers develop into responsible adults—time is 
the rider that breaks youth. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1640, in George 
Herbert’s Outlandish Proverbs.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: wanton kittens make sober cats; 
with age comes wisdom.
time lost cannot be recalled  Time 
wasted cannot be reclaimed: “And time 
lost may well be repented, but never 
recalled” (John Lyly, Euphues and his 
England, 1580). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1385 in Geoffrey Chaucer’s 
Troilus and Criseyde.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
lose an hour in the morning, chase it 
all day; yesterday will not be called 
again.
times change, and we with time  Cus-
toms, values, and circumstances are 
constantly changing, and we must adapt 
ourselves accordingly: When I fi rst started 
work, nobody addressed their superiors or 
inferiors by their fi rst names. But times change, 
and we with time—I don’t even know the sur-
names of some of the people I work with today. 
The proverb is of Latin origin: “Tempora 
mutantur nos et mutamur in illis [Times are 
changing and we with them].” It is often 
shortened to “Times change.”
Variant of this proverb: times change, 
and we with them.
time will heal  See time is a great 
healer.
time will tell  Some things can only be 
judged or known after the passage of 
time: I hope I have made the right decision, 
but only time will tell. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in its current form in the 
20th century, earlier forms being “Time 
will show,” “Time reveals all things,” and 
“Time discloses all things.” The sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin, occurring 
in the writings of the Greek poet and dra-
matist Menander (c. 342–292 b.c.): “time 
brings the truth to light.”
Variants of this proverb: time alone 
will tell; only time will tell.
time works wonders  Great things can 
be achieved in the course of time: I 
thought she would never learn the job, but time 
works wonders, and now she is one of our best 
employees. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1588 in A. Marten’s Exhortation to 
Defend Country.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
time is a great healer.
timing is everything  It is important to 
choose the right time to do something: 
Timing is everything, and this is probably not 
the best moment to reopen the public debate 
about capital punishment. The proverb 
comes from the Greek poet Hesiod’s 
Works and Days (eighth century b.c.): 
“Observe due measure, for right timing is 
in all things the most important factor.”
’tis better to have loved and lost, than 
never to have loved at all  It is better to 
have experienced the joy of love, even if it 
ends in sorrow, than never to have had that 
experience: I was devastated when my daugh-
ter died, but I cherish all my happy memories of 
her, and consider myself more blessed than some 
of my childless friends—’tis better to have loved 
and lost, than never to have loved at all. In its 
current form, the proverb comes from 
Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s poem “In Memo-
riam” (1850), but a similar sentiment 
 ’tis better to have loved and lost, than never to have loved at all
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   275 1/29/07   5:13:04 PM
276
was expressed by William Congreve 150 
years earlier in his play The Way of the World 
(1700): “Say what you will, ’tis better to 
be left, than never to have been loved.”
today is yesterday’s tomorrow  You can-
not go on putting things off, because the 
future becomes the present: “I’ll quit smok-
ing tomorrow.” “You’ve said that before. Today 
is yesterday’s tomorrow, so why not quit now?” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1745 in 
Edward Young’s Night Thoughts.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never put off until tomorrow what 
you can do today.
today you, tomorrow me  What happens 
to one person one day could happen to 
another person the next day: “‘Comrade,’ 
I say to the dead man, but I say it calmly, 
‘Today you, tomorrow me’” (Erich Maria 
Remarque, All Quiet on the Western Front, 
1929). The proverb is of Latin origin: 
“Hodie mihi, cras tibi [Today it is my turn, 
tomorrow yours].”
Variant of this proverb: I today, you 
tomorrow.
to each his own  Everybody has his or 
her own tastes and idiosyncrasies: Standing 
in the rain watching cars drive around a race-
track all afternoon is not my idea of fun, but to 
each his own. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1713 in Wise, Churches Quarrel Espoused.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every man to his taste.
to err is human, to forgive divine  We 
all make mistakes, but not everybody 
is tolerant of the mistakes of others; 
sometimes used to ask for forgiveness, 
implying that it would be a magnanimous 
gesture: “The modern moralist pardons 
everything, because he is not certain of 
anything, except that to err is human” 
(London Times Literary Supplement, 1908). 
The fi rst part of the proverb sometimes 
stands alone, as in the quotation, and is 
also found in the Latin form “Humanum 
est errare.” In its current form, the proverb 
comes from Alexander Pope’s Essay on 
Criticism (1711). Earlier versions do not 
mention forgiveness, but add that “to 
repent is divine” or “to persevere is dia-
bolical.” A modern facetious variant is “To 
err is human, but to really foul things up 
requires a computer.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: homer sometimes nods; nobody is 
infallible.
to everything there is a season  Ev-
erything has its own appropriate time: 
Don’t be too impatient to start a family—to 
everything there is a season. The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “To everything there is a 
season, and a time to every purpose under 
the heaven” (Ecclesiastes 3:1). The passage 
goes on to list numerous examples: “A 
time to be born, and a time to die; . . . A 
time to kill, and a time to heal; . . . A time 
to weep, and a time to laugh; . . . A time 
to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, 
and a time of peace.”
Variant of this proverb: there’s a sea-
son and a time for every purpose under 
the heaven.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s a time and place for every-
thing.
to forget a wrong is the best revenge  See 
the best way to get even is to forget.
to know all is to forgive all  The better 
you understand somebody’s motives, the 
today is yesterday’s tomorrow
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   276 1/29/07   5:13:04 PM
277
more likely you are to pardon him or her: 
If only you would let me explain, you would see 
things in a different light—to know all is to 
forgive all. First recorded in English in the 
mid-20th century, the proverb may be of 
French origin.
tomorrow is another day  Don’t worry 
about what has happened today—things 
may improve tomorrow; also used with 
reference to making a fresh start: The search 
party has just returned, somewhat dispirited, 
but tomorrow is another day and they haven’t 
given up hope of fi nding the child alive. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, in its variant 
form, c. 1527. It was popularized as the 
closing line of Margaret Mitchell’s novel 
Gone with the Wind (1936): “Tomorrow, I’ll 
think of some way to get him back. After 
all, tomorrow is another day.”
Variant of this proverb: tomorrow 
is a new day.
tomorrow never comes  If you keep 
putting something off until tomorrow, it 
will never get done: “To-morrow, every 
Fault is to be amended; but that To-mor-
row never comes” (Benjamin Franklin, 
Poor Richard’s Almanack, 1756). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, in 1523 in Lord Berners’s 
Froissart.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one of these days is none of these 
days.
the tongue always returns to the sore 
tooth  People cannot help thinking or 
talking about what is bothering them 
most at a particular time: I tried to bury 
myself in my work, but my mind kept going back 
to the argument I’d had with my husband the 
day before—the tongue always returns to the 
sore tooth. The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in 1586.
Variant of this proverb: the tongue 
ever turns to the aching tooth.
the tongue is not steel, but it cuts 
Words can cause as much pain and dam-
age as an edged tool or weapon: The 
tongue is not steel, but it cuts, and the scars 
left by her cruel words took many months to 
heal. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1640, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: hard words break no bones; sticks 
and stones may break my bones, but 
names will never hurt me.
too many chiefs and not enough Indians 
There are too many people giving orders 
and not enough following them, or too 
many people in charge and not enough to 
do the work: It was a classic case of too many 
chiefs and not enough Indians, with a top-heavy 
management structure and an overstretched 
labor force. The proverb is thought to have 
originated in Australia about 1940.
Variants of this proverb: all chiefs 
and no Indians; too many chiefs and not 
enough braves.
too many cooks spoil the broth  Too 
many people trying to help can be a 
hindrance; also used of too many people 
working on the same project, often pull-
ing in different directions: Some of the 
worst movies I’ve ever seen have a whole string 
of screenwriters in the credits, proving that too 
many cooks spoil the broth. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1575 in the form “The 
more cooks the worse potage.” Other 
words may be substituted for broth, such 
as brew, stew, or pie.
 too many cooks spoil the broth
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   277 1/29/07   5:13:04 PM
278
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: many hands make light work.
too much of a good thing is worse than 
none at all  See you can have too 
much of a good thing.
toot your own horn lest the same be 
never tooted  Sing your own praises, in 
case nobody else does: I think modesty is 
highly overrated as a virtue—my motto is “Toot 
your own horn lest the same be never tooted.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1776 in 
Warren-Adams Letters.
Variant of this proverb: if you don’t 
toot your own horn, nobody else will.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: self-praise is no recommendation.
to the pure all things are pure  Virtuous 
people tend to be unaware of the wicked-
ness or evil that is around them; sometimes 
used to imply naivety: To the pure all things 
are pure, and it never occurred to her that he 
might have an ulterior motive in asking to see the 
picture that hung over her bed. The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “Unto the pure all things 
are pure: but unto them that are defi led and 
unbelieving is nothing pure” (Titus 1:15).
to the victor belong the spoils  The 
winner of a contest or battle gets every-
thing that goes with victory: The winner of 
the championship gets a lot more than a tro-
phy—sponsorship deals, celebrity status—to 
the victor belong the spoils. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1832, in a speech made 
by Senator William L. Marcy of New 
York. F. Scott Fitzgerald turned it around 
in his novel The Beautiful and Damned 
(1922): “The victor belongs to the spoils.”
touch wood  If nothing goes wrong, every-
thing will turn out satisfactorily: I expect the 
delivery to arrive in the morning, touch wood. 
This proverbial charm was fi rst recorded in 
1805 in R. Anderson’s Ballads in Cumberland 
Dialect but may be much older. It refers to 
the ancient superstition (possibly rooted in 
pagan tree worship) that it is lucky to touch 
wood when you make a wish—and many 
people even today will seek to touch a piece 
of nearby wood as they say the charm.
Variant of this proverb: knock on 
wood; touch wood, it’s sure to come 
good.
trade follows the fl ag  One nation may 
colonize another for commercial pur-
poses: “The removal of a million poor 
creatures to Canada and the establishment 
of them there . . . would probably have 
turned out . . . a profi table investment. 
Trade follows the fl ag” (J. A. Froude, 
Fraser’s Magazine, 1870). The quotation is 
the fi rst recorded use of the proverb.
travel broadens the mind  People 
become more broad-minded and knowl-
edgeable by visiting other countries and 
learning about the customs, culture, and 
lifestyle of those who live there: “He 
may be a trifl e cracked . . . but that’s 
only because his travels have been too 
much for his intellect. They say travel 
broadens the mind; but you must have the 
mind” (G. K. Chesterton, The Poet and the 
Lunatics, 1929). The quotation is the fi rst 
recorded use of the proverb.
travel east and travel west, a man’s own 
home is still the best  See east, west, 
home’s best.
a traveler may lie with authority  People 
who have traveled may boast of their expe-
riences without fear of contradiction: No 
too much of a good thing is worse than none at all
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   278 1/29/07   5:13:04 PM
279
one believed the tale the stranger was spinning, 
but a traveller may lie with authority and no one 
could prove he was talking through the top of his 
hat. The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1362 
in William Langland’s Piers Plowman.
Variant of this proverb: soldiers and 
travelers may lie in authority.
the tree is known by its fruit  Peo-
ple should judged by what they do or 
produce—specifi cally, by their chil-
dren—rather than by fi rst impressions 
or outward appearance: “If then the tree 
may be known by the fruit, as the fruit 
by the tree, then, peremptorily I speak it, 
there is virtue in that Falstaff ” (William 
Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, 1597–98). 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Either 
make the tree good, and his fruit good; or 
else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit 
corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruit” 
(Matthew 12:33).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
handsome is as handsome does.
trifl es make perfection, and perfection is 
no trifl e  Perfection is a great thing, but 
not easy to achieve, and attention to detail 
is of the utmost importance: She kept going 
back over her work, changing a comma here and 
a word there, until she was completely satisfi ed. 
It was a tiresome exercise, but trifl es make perfec-
tion, and perfection is no trifl e. The proverb is 
attributed to the Italian artist Michelangelo 
(1475–1564), who is said to have made 
this remark to a friend after spending 
several days putting almost imperceptible 
fi nishing touches to a sculpture.
a trouble shared is a trouble halved  It 
often helps to discuss your problems with 
somebody else: Advice columnists are inun-
dated with letters from those how believe that a 
trouble shared is a trouble halved. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1931 in Dorothy 
L. Sayers’s Five Red Herrings.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
misery loves company.
troubles never come singly  See misfor-
tunes never come singly.
true blue will never stain  Persons of 
real integrity can never be corrupted. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1630 in the 
Roxburghe Ballads: “You know true blew 
will never stain.” One explanation of the 
proverb refers to the blue dye for which 
the city of Coventry, England, was known 
(and by which residents of the city might 
recognize each other), while another 
refers to the blue aprons of butchers, 
the dark color of which served to make 
bloodstains less obvious. There may also 
be a reference to the color blue as worn 
by the incorruptible Virgin Mary.
trust everybody, but cut the cards  Have 
faith in the honesty and integrity of those 
around you, but remain on your guard 
and take precautions in case you are 
wrong: I have no reason to doubt his word, 
but I want to check out the story before tak-
ing any further action—trust everybody, but 
cut the cards. First recorded in English in 
1900, the proverb is of Russian origin: 
“Trust, but verify.” It was popularized 
by President Ronald Reagan in the late 
1980s.
trust in God and keep your powder 
dry  See put your trust in god, and 
keep your powder dry.
trust not a new friend nor an old enemy 
It is foolish to trust either a friend of short 
 trust not a new friend nor an old enemy
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   279 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
280
standing or someone else who may harbor 
hostile feelings: She realized too late the 
truth of the old saw that you should never trust 
a new friend nor an old enemy. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in a ballad of 1450.
Variant of this proverb: trust not the 
praise of a friend nor the contempt of an 
enemy.
trust not one night’s ice  Do not rely 
upon something that has yet to be tried 
and tested: The general declined the offer of 
a royal audience, privately telling his advisers 
that he had learnt not to trust one night’s ice. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1651 in 
George Herbert’s Outlandish Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
first try and then trust.
trust not the praise of a friend nor the 
contempt of an enemy  See trust not a 
new friend nor an old enemy.
the truth hurts  It is often unpleasant 
to learn the truth: “We want the truth. 
The President wants it. I want it. And 
the American people have a fundamental 
right to it. And if the truth hurts, so be it” 
(George Bush, New York Times, 1986). The 
fi rst recorded use of this proverb is in Rob-
ert Browning’s Fifi ne at the Fair (1872).
truth is stranger than fi ction  The truth 
is often far more unlikely than anything 
that can be dreamed up by the imagina-
tion: “He has based all his brilliancy and 
solidity upon the hackneyed, but yet 
forgotten, fact that truth is stranger than 
fi ction. Truth, of course, must of necessity 
be stranger than fi ction, for we have made 
fi ction to suit ourselves” (G. K. Chester-
ton, Heretics, 1905). The proverb comes 
from Lord Byron’s poem “Don Juan” 
(1823): “’Tis strange—but true; for truth 
is always strange;/Stranger than fi ction; if 
it could be told,/How much would nov-
els gain by the exchange!”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
fact is stranger than fiction.
truth is the fi rst casualty of war  When 
war breaks out, the truth quickly succumbs 
to propaganda and rumor. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1928 by A. Ponsonby in 
Falsehood in Wartime: “When war is declared, 
Truth is the fi rst casualty.”
truth is truth to the end of the reckon-
ing  The truth can never be changed: If 
it was true then, it is must be true now—truth 
is truth to the end of the reckoning. In its 
current form, the proverb comes from 
Shakespeare’s play Measure for Measure 
(5:1; 1604), “Nay, it is ten times true; for 
truth is truth/To the end of reckoning.” 
The sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
earlier origin.
truth lies at the bottom of a well  It is 
often very diffi cult to discover the truth: 
We will probably never know exactly what hap-
pened on that night—truth lies at the bottom 
of a well, and everybody I’ve interviewed so 
far has given me a different version of events. 
The proverb is attributed to the Greek 
philosopher Democritus (c. 460–c. 370 
b.c.): “we know nothing certainly, for 
truth lies in the deep.”
Variant of this proverb: truth keeps 
to the bottom of her well.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: truth will out.
truth will out  The truth cannot be con-
cealed forever: “After all, the names of 
the principal characters will be quite as 
trust not one night’s ice
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   280 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
281
much disguised; for though in this history 
the chronicler would prefer to conceal 
the facts under a mass of contradic-
tions, anachronisms, improbabilities, and 
absurdities, the truth will out in spite of 
him” (Honoré de Balzac, The Collection of 
Antiquities, 1839). First recorded in 1439, 
the proverb occurs in Shakespeare’s play 
The Merchant of Venice (2:2), “Truth will 
come to light; murder cannot be hid 
long; a man’s son may, but in the end 
truth will out.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: truth lies at the bottom of a well.
try before you trust  See first try then 
trust.
Tuesday’s child is full of grace  Chil-
dren born on a Tuesday are supposed to 
be graceful in movement and bearing; 
also interpreted in other senses of the 
word grace: If it were true that Tuesday’s child 
is full of grace, you might expect to fi nd that a 
disproportionate number of ballet dancers and 
models were born on that day. The proverb is 
the second line of a traditional rhyme. See 
entries at the days of the week for other 
proverbs from this rhyme.
282
turnabout is fair play  Taking turns to do 
something is the fairest way to proceed: 
Come away from the computer and let your 
sister use it for a while—turnabout is fair play. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1755.
two and two make four  Logic dictates 
that something must be so: Two and two 
make four and the geologists were forced to 
admit that the signs of an impending earth-
quake were all there. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1697 in Jeremy Collier’s Essays 
on Moral Subjects.
Variant of this proverb: two and two 
do not make fi ve.
two blacks don’t make a white  See two 
wrongs don’t make a right.
two boys are half a boy, and three boys 
are no boy at all  When two or more 
boys work together, they distract each 
other and do less work between them than 
a single boy working alone: If the twins and 
their brother offer to help, I usually pick just 
one of them, on the principle that two boys are 
half a boy, and three boys are no boy at all. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1930 in 
F. Thompson’s Country Calendar.
two can keep a secret if one is dead  See 
three may keep a secret, if two of them 
are dead.
two dogs fi ght over a bone while a third 
runs away with it  See while two dogs 
are fighting for a bone, a third runs 
away with it.
two eyes see more than one  See four 
eyes see more than two.
two heads are better than one  A prob-
lem is more quickly solved if two people 
put their minds to it: Can you help me 
check these fi gures? There’s an error in here 
somewhere, but I can’t fi nd it, and two heads 
are better than one. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1390 in John Gower, Confessio 
Amantis in the form “Tuo han more wit 
then on.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
four eyes see more than two.
two is company but three is none  See 
two’s company, three’s a crowd.
two of a trade never agree  Members 
of the same trade or profession often do 
not get on with one another, because of 
rivalry: They say that two of a trade never 
agree, but my parents, both accountants, have 
been happily married for 30 years now. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with differ-
ent wording, in 1630 by Thomas Dekker, 
Honest Whore, Part II.
Variant of this proverb: two of a 
trade seldom agree.
two’s company, three’s a crowd  Two 
people, especially friends or lovers, often 
regard a third as an unwelcome intruder: 
Why does she always want to tag along with 
us? Has she never heard the saying “Two’s 
company, three’s a crowd” ? The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in the mid-19th century, 
in the form “Two is company but three 
is none,” (W. C. Hazlitt, English Proverbs) 
but the sentiment it expresses is of ear-
lier origin.
Variants of this proverb: two is com-
pany but three is none; two’s a couple, 
three’s a crowd, four’s too many, and 
fi ve’s not allowed.
two tailors go to a man  See nine tai-
lors make a man.
turnabout is fair play
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   282 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
283
two wrongs don’t make a right  Wrong-
doing is always unacceptable, even if 
another person has done the same thing; 
often used to discourage or condemn 
retaliation: “‘Why didn’t you just hit him 
over the head and take the bedsheet away 
from him?’ Yossarian asked. . . . Milo shook 
his head. ‘That would have been unjust,’ 
he scolded fi rmly. ‘Force is wrong, and 
two wrongs never make a right’” (Joseph 
Heller, Catch-22, 1961). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, in its variant form, in 
1721. In The Second Sin (1773), Thomas 
Szasz mischievously argued that “Two 
wrongs don’t make a right, but they make 
a good excuse.”
Variant of this proverb: two blacks 
don’t make a white.
 two wrongs don’t make a right