284
uneasy lies the head that wears a 
crown  Those in power are weighed 
down by responsibilities, feelings of inse-
curity, or fears of losing their position 
and can never rest easy: “‘Uneasy lies the 
head that wears a crown!’ Stepan Arka-
dyevich said playfully, hinting, evidently, 
not simply at the Princess’s conversation, 
but at the cause of Levin’s agitation, 
which he had noticed” (Leo Tolstoy, Anna 
Karenina, 1873–77). The proverb comes 
from Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, Part 2 
(3:1; 1597), “Canst thou, O partial sleep, 
give thy repose/To the wet sea-boy in an 
hour so rude,/And in the calmest and 
most stillest night,/ . . . /Deny it to a king? 
Then happy low, lie down!/Uneasy lies 
the head that wears a crown.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the highest branch is not the 
safest roost; the post of honor is the 
post of danger.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: better be first in a village than 
second at rome.
the unexpected always happens  You 
can be always be sure that something 
unforeseen will happen for which you 
are not prepared: “Have nothing which 
in a case of emergency you cannot carry 
in your own hands. But remember that 
the unexpected always happens” (Evelyn 
Waugh, Scoop, 1938). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1885, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the writings of the Roman 
dramatist Plautus (c. 250–184 b.c.).
Variant of this proverb: it’s always 
the unexpected that happens.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
nothing is certain but the unforeseen.
union is strength  People can achieve 
greater things by working together than by 
working alone: “Union is strength; union is 
also weakness. It is a good thing to harness 
two horses to a cart; but it is not a good 
thing to try and turn two hansom cabs into 
one four-wheeler” (G. K. Chesterton, Her-
etics, 1905). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1654 in the form “Union 
strengthens.” The sentiment it expresses, 
however, is of ancient origin, occurring 
in Homer’s Iliad (c. eighth century b.c.): 
“even weak men have strength in unity.”
Variant of this proverb: in unity 
there is strength.
united we stand, divided we fall  It is 
important that a group of people remain 
united in order to succeed; often used 
to discourage dissatisfi ed members from 
breaking away: We must have the support of 
u
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   284 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
285
the entire workforce in this protest—united we 
stand, divided we fall. The proverb comes 
from John Dickinson’s “Liberty Song,” 
published in the Boston Gazette in 1768: 
“Then join hand in hand, brave Americans 
all,/By uniting we stand, by dividing we 
fall.” The sentiment it expresses, however, 
is of ancient origin, occurring in one of the 
fables of Aesop (sixth century b.c.), about 
a lion that persuades a group of bulls to 
separate and kills them one by one.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
divide and conquer; a house divided 
against itself cannot stand.
use brains not brawn  See wisdom goes 
beyond strength.
the used key is always bright  Activity, 
work, and exercise keep the mind and 
body in good form: You must practice 
regularly to keep your skills up to scratch—the 
used key is always bright. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
1561 in Kitt Hath Lost Key.
Variant of this proverb: iron not used 
soon rusts.
use legs and have legs  The body, among 
other things, will continue to work prop-
erly only if kept in regular use: When it 
comes to the maintenance of general fi tness the 
old adage “use legs and have legs” still holds 
true. First recorded in G. Harvey, Margina-
lia (c. 1582): “Use Legges, & have Legges: 
Use Law and Have Law. Use nether & 
have nether.”
use your head and save your feet  See 
let your head save your heels.
 use your head and save your feet 