286
variety is the spice of life  Change and 
difference make life interesting: People who 
never go to the same place twice on vacation 
fall into two groups—those who believe that 
variety is the spice of life and those who are con-
stantly and vainly searching for the ideal spot. 
The proverb comes from William Cowper’s 
poem “The Task” (1785): “Variety’s the very 
spice of life,/That gives it all its fl avour.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a change is as good as a rest.
the vicar of Bray will be vicar of Bray 
still  Some people doggedly cling to offi ce 
or other privileges however much cir-
cumstances might change around them: 
The chairman refused to resign after the vote, 
prompting one of his critics to observe “the vicar 
of Bray will be vicar of Bray still.” The proverb 
was recorded by Thomas Fuller in The His-
tory of the Worthies of England in 1662. It 
refers to an infamous vicar of Bray who 
during the reign of Henry VIII stubbornly 
held onto his post, fi rst as a Catholic, then 
as a Protestant.
victory has a hundred fathers and defeat 
is an orphan  See success has many 
fathers, while failure is an orphan.
virtue is its own reward  The satisfaction 
of knowing you have done the right thing 
is all that is needed: I know that virtue is its 
own reward, and I certainly didn’t expect to 
be paid for my efforts, but she could at least 
have thanked me! First recorded in Eng-
lish in 1509, in the form “Virtue has no 
reward,” the proverb has been traced back 
to the works of the Roman poet Ovid (43 
b.c.–a.d. 18).
the voice of the people is the voice of 
God  The will of the people must be 
obeyed; also used to imply that the peo-
ple are always right: “One Sansculottic 
bough that cannot fail to fl ourish is Jour-
nalism. The voice of the People being the 
voice of God, shall not such divine voice 
make itself heard? To the ends of France; 
and in as many dialects as when the fi rst 
great Babel was to be built!” (Thomas 
Carlyle, The French Revolution, 1837). Of 
ancient origin, the proverb is sometimes 
used in its original Latin form, “Vox populi, 
vox Dei.”
a volunteer is worth ten pressed 
men  See one volunteer is worth two 
pressed men.
v