287
walls have ears  What you say may be 
overheard; used as a warning: “In Paris, 
where walls have ears, where doors have 
tongues, and window bars have eyes, there 
are few things more dangerous than the 
practice of standing to chat in a gateway” 
(Honoré de Balzac, Cousin Pons, 1847–48). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1592.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
fields have eyes and woods have ears.
walnuts and pears you plant for your 
heirs  Walnut trees and pear trees take 
a long time to produce fruit: A new fast-
yielding variety has been developed, giving 
the lie to the old saying “Walnuts and pears 
you plant for your heirs.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1732 in the form “He 
who plants a walnut tree expects not to 
eat of the fruit.” The idea that trees of any 
kind are generally planted for the benefi t 
of succeeding generations, however, is of 
ancient origin.
wanton kittens make sober cats  Peo-
ple who live wildly or extravagantly in 
their youth usually develop into sensible 
and responsible adults: I’ve heard that wan-
ton kittens make sober cats, but it was hard 
to believe that the demure young woman who 
answered the door was the troublesome girl 
who had caused her parents so much anxiety 
several years earlier. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1732 in Thomas Fuller, Gno-
mologia: Adagies and Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
time is the rider that breaks youth.
war is hell  War is a horrifi c experience 
and a terrible thing: “Let’s not regard the 
Germans as enemies. War is never black 
or white: war is hell for all involved” 
(Time, 1994). The proverb is associated 
with General William T. Sherman, who 
used it in 1880: “There is many a boy 
here today who looks on war as all glory, 
but, boys, it is all hell.” The sentiment it 
expresses, however, is of earlier origin.
war is too important to be left to the 
generals  Those in authority cannot be 
relied on to do their job properly; applied 
to warfare, diplomacy, or government: 
War is too important to be left to the gener-
als, even in peacetime—the offensive action 
ordered by the police chiefs only heightened the 
tension and exacerbated the riot. The proverb 
has been attributed to various people, 
notably the French politicians Charles-
Maurice de Talleyrand (1754–1838) and 
Georges Clemenceau (1841–1929).
war will cease when men refuse to 
fi ght  There will always be war while 
w
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   287 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
288
there are people who are prepared to 
serve in the armed forces; a pacifi st 
slogan: If it is true that war will cease when 
men refuse to fi ght, then the present military 
recruitment crisis should not be a cause for 
alarm. The proverb is of 20th-century 
origin.
waste not, want not  If you make full 
and careful use of your resources, you will 
never be in need; applied to everything 
from the eating up of leftover food to 
domestic and industrial recycling: “There 
were, besides, some little pleasures in 
the shape of helping her to vegetable 
she didn’t want, and when it had nearly 
alighted on her plate taking across for his 
own use, on the plea of waste not, want 
not” (Thomas Hardy, Under the Green-
wood Tree, 1872). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1800 (in Maria 
Edgeworth, Parent’s Assistant), but the sen-
timent it expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
willful waste makes woeful want.
a watched pot never boils  It seems that 
things take longer to happen when you 
watch or wait with impatience: “What’s 
the use of watching? A watched pot never 
boils, and I see you are after watching 
that weather-cock. Why now, I try never 
to look at it, else I could do nought else” 
(Elizabeth Gaskell, Mary Barton, 1848). 
This quotation is the fi rst recorded use of 
the proverb.
water fi nds its own level  See water 
seeks its own level.
water is the only drink for a wise 
man  Wise people avoid drinking alco-
hol: He is strictly teetotal, never having 
touched a drop in his life, believing that water 
is the only drink for a wise man. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1854, in Henry 
David Thoreau’s Walden.
water seeks its own level  People tend 
to be drawn toward, or to end up with, 
others of the same background, class, 
intelligence, or experience: You can’t go 
on pretending to be better than you are—water 
seeks its own level. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1778 in Public Papers of George 
Clinton, First Governor of New York.
Variant of this proverb: water fi nds 
its own level.
the way to a man’s heart is through his 
stomach  The best way to please a man 
is by feeding him well: “‘Well, you know, 
the way to a man’s heart is through his 
stomach, Cornelia,’ explained Captain 
Jim. ‘I believe you—when he HAS a 
heart,’ retorted Miss Cornelia. ‘I suppose 
that’s why so many women kill them-
selves cooking’” (Lucy Maud Montgom-
ery, Anne’s House of Dreams, 1917). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1814, in the 
form “The shortest road to men’s hearts 
is down their throats,” in a letter written 
by John Adams.
the way to be safe is never to feel 
secure  See he that is too secure is 
not safe.
the weakest go to the wall  In any con-
fl ict or struggle, the weakest will always 
lose, be defeated, fail, or be ruined: You 
have to be aggressive and self-assertive to 
survive in this industry, where the weakest go 
to the wall. The proverb dates from before 
1500, and occurs in Shakespeare’s play 
Romeo and Juliet (1:1). It is said to have 
waste not, want not
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   288 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
289
originally referred to seating installed 
around the walls of medieval churches, 
and has given rise to the fi gurative phrase 
to go to the wall, to be ruined; to fall or fail 
in a struggle.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
providence is always on the side of 
the big battalions.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the race is not to the swift, nor 
the battle to the strong.
we all have our cross to bear  Nobody is 
exempt from suffering—we all have our 
own problems and affl ictions: I know life is 
hard for him, but I wish he wouldn’t complain 
so much—we all have our cross to bear. The 
proverb is an allusion to the biblical quo-
tation “And whosoever doth not bear his 
cross, and come after me, cannot be my 
disciple” (Luke 14:27).
wealth makes many friends  Many 
people want to be the friend of a rich 
person: Wealth makes many friends—but 
these so-called friends will lose interest in you 
when your money runs out. The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “Wealth maketh many 
friends; but the poor is separated from his 
neighbor” (Proverbs 19:4).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that has a full purse never wanted 
a friend.
the wearer best knows where the shoe 
pinches  Nobody can fully understand 
another person’s hardship or suffering: 
The wearer best knows where the shoe pinches, 
and charitable organizations must consult with 
those they are trying to help, so that the aid 
can be directed where it is most needed. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “I 
woot best where wryngeth me my sho.” 
The sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
ancient origin, occurring in the writings 
of Plutarch (c. 46–c. a.d. 120).
wear your learning like your watch, in a 
private pocket  Do not make a show of 
your knowledge or education: She is one 
of those who believe that you should wear your 
learning like your watch, in a private pocket, 
and few people would guess that she is one of 
the country’s leading astronomers. The prov-
erb comes from a letter written by Lord 
Chesterfi eld in 1748: “Wear your learn-
ing, like your watch in a private pocket: 
and do not merely pull it out and strike it; 
merely to show that you have one.”
wedlock is a padlock  Marriage brings 
with it many restrictions on personal 
freedom: Wedlock is a padlock, and divorce 
lawyers make a comfortable income selling peo-
ple the key. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1678 in John Ray’s English Proverbs.
Wednesday’s child is full of woe  Chil-
dren born on a Wednesday are supposed to 
be miserable by nature: My mother gave up 
trying to make Sam smile for the camera—he 
was born on a Wednesday, and seemed determined 
to prove that Wednesday’s child is full of woe. 
The proverb is the third line of a traditional 
rhyme. See entries at the days of the week 
for other proverbs from this rhyme.
we have nothing to fear but fear 
itself  See the only thing we have to 
fear is fear itself.
welcome is the best cheer  Welcoming 
your guests with friendly hospitality is 
more important than giving them fi ne food 
and wine: Tom is a kind, generous, and jovial 
 welcome is the best cheer
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   289 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
290
host, which makes up for his shortcomings in the 
kitchen—as they say, welcome is the best cheer. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1550 in 
the form “Welcome is the best dish.”
Variant of this proverb: welcome is 
the best dish on the table.
well begun is half done  If you make 
a good start to a task, it will be quickly 
completed: If you cut the pieces out carefully 
and accurately, you will have no diffi culty fi t-
ting them together—well begun is half done. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English, 
with different wording, c. 1415. The sen-
timent it expresses, however, is of ancient 
origin, occurring in the writings of Plato 
and Horace.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good beginning is half the battle.
we must eat a peck of dirt before we 
die  Everybody must suffer a certain 
amount of unpleasantness during his or 
her lifetime; also used literally, as when 
eating unwashed food: Whenever I came 
home from school with a tale of woe, my mother 
would console me with her favorite saying, “We 
must eat a peck of dirt before we die.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1738, in 
Jonathan Swift’s Polite Conversation.
Variant of this proverb: you have to 
eat a bushel of dirt before you die.
we must learn to walk before we can 
run  It is necessary to learn the basics 
before progressing to more advanced 
things: “More fail from doing too much 
than too little. We must learn and be 
strong enough to walk before we can run” 
(James Platt, Business, 1875). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, c. 1350. Early examples of its use had 
creep and go in place of walk and run.
Variant of this proverb: you have to 
learn to crawl before you can walk.
a wet May brings plenty of hay  Wet 
weather in May means the hay harvest will 
be good later in the year: As farmers every-
where will tell you, “a wet May brings plenty 
of hay.” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1846 in M. A. Denham’s A Collection of 
Proverbs . . . relating to the Weather.
what a tangled web we weave when fi rst 
we practice to deceive  Once you have 
told one lie, you fi nd yourself supporting 
it with other related lies, constructing an 
elaborate network of deceit from which it 
is not easy to escape: “People have pretty 
well forgotten my other mistakes. . . . But 
they’ll never forget this. They will think 
I am not respectable. Oh, Marilla, ‘what 
a tangled web we weave when fi rst we 
practice to deceive.’ That is poetry, but it 
is true.” (Lucy Maud Montgomery, Anne 
of Green Gables, 1908). The proverb comes 
from Sir Walter Scott’s poem Marmion 
(1808).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one lie leads to another.
what can’t be cured must be endured  If 
something cannot be put right, we must 
learn to put up with it: “‘What cannot be 
cured must be endured,’ the chained man 
says, trying to smile. But it comes out as 
a grimace” (Washington Post, 1997). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1579, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
what can you expect from a pig but a 
grunt?  Boorish or uncouth people can-
not be expected to behave in any other 
way; used as an insult when such a person 
well begun is half done
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   290 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
291
says or does something rude: His remark 
was in very poor taste, but what can you expect 
from a pig but a grunt? The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
in 1731.
whatever man has done, man may do  If 
one person has succeeded in doing some-
thing, it should not be impossible for 
another person to do it too: “‘Dark Deeds 
are written in an unknown tongue called 
“Lawyerish,” where the sense is “as one 
grain of wheat in two bushels of chaff,” 
pick it out if you can.’ ‘Whatever man 
has done man may do,’ said Dr. Sampson 
stoutly. ‘You have read it, and yet under-
stood it: so why mayn’t we, ye monster 
o’ conceit?’” (Charles Reade, Hard Cash, 
1863). The quotation is the fi rst recorded 
use of the proverb.
Variant of this proverb: what man 
has done, man can do.
what everybody says must be true  Pub-
lic opinion is generally assumed to be accu-
rate: “Everybody said so. Far be it from me 
to assert that what everybody says must 
be true. Everybody is, often, as likely to 
be wrong as right” (Charles Dickens, The 
Haunted Man and the Ghost’s Bargain, 1848). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, with dif-
ferent wording, c. 1475.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: common fame is seldom to blame; 
there’s no smoke without fire.
what goes around, comes around  Those 
who say or do bad things to other people 
are likely to fi nd themselves on the 
receiving end of similar criticism or 
treatment in the future; also used to 
imply that everybody eventually gets his 
or her just deserts: “No sooner had the 
royal accusers sent Louis XVI and his 
queen to the guillotine, than they them-
selves were being hoist onto the tumbrels 
by men whose own heads would later 
drop into the basket. What goes around 
comes around” (Washington Times, 1989). 
Of U.S. origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1974.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: curses, like chickens, come home 
to roost.
what goes up must come down  The 
law of gravity must be obeyed; also used 
fi guratively of any rise and fall: What goes 
up must come down, even on Wall Street, and 
you must sell your stocks at exactly the right 
moment to get the best return on your invest-
ment. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1929 in F. A. Pottle’s Stretchers.
what has happened once can happen 
again  Something that has a precedent 
cannot be dismissed as impossible, and 
may recur: What has happened once can 
happen again, but next time we will be better 
prepared to control the disease before it reaches 
epidemic proportions. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1815 in Journal of a Young Man 
of Massachusetts.
what man has done, man can do  See 
whatever man has done, man may do.
what must be, must be  See what will 
be, will be.
what’s bred in the bone will come out 
in the fl esh  Inherited characteristics 
be come evident in each new generation: 
In his middle years he became an alcoholic, like 
his father and grandfather before him—what’s 
bred in the bone will come out in the fl esh. Of 
 what’s bred in the bone will come out in the fl esh
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   291 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
292
medieval Latin origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in Sir Thomas 
Malory’s Le Morte d’Arthur (c. 1470), 
in the form “Harde hit ys to take oute 
off the fl eysshe that ys bredde in the 
bone.” The current form of the proverb 
is a comparatively recent alteration of 
the original, “What’s bred in the bone 
will not (come) out of the fl esh,” which 
has a slightly different meaning, imply-
ing that inherited characteristics cannot 
be eradicated: “Even Benjamin lost all 
patience with me this time. ‘What is 
bred in the bone,’ he said, quoting the 
old proverb, ‘will never come out of the 
fl esh. In years gone by, you were the most 
obstinate child that ever made a mess in 
a nursery’” (Wilkie Collins, The Law and 
the Lady, 1875).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: blood will tell; nature passes 
nurture.
what’s done cannot be undone  Once 
something has been done, it cannot 
be changed, no matter how much you 
regret having done it: “‘I shouldn’t have 
hurried on our affair, and brought you 
to a half-furnished hut before I was 
ready, if it had not been for the news 
you gave me, which made it necessary to 
save you, ready or no . . . Good God!’ 
‘Don’t take on, dear. What’s done can’t 
be undone’” (Thomas Hardy, Jude the 
Obscure, 1895). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English c. 1450, but the sen-
timent it expresses is of ancient origin. 
It occurs in Shakespeare’s play Macbeth 
(1605–06) in both its forms, “What’s 
done is done” (3:2) and “What’s done 
cannot be undone” (5:1).
Variant of this proverb: what’s done 
is done.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: it’s no use crying over spilled milk; 
things past cannot be recalled.
what’s good for General Motors is good 
for America  Anything that benefi ts busi-
ness and commerce is of benefi t to the 
country as a whole: “You will never hear 
from me . . . that this country should do 
this or that simply because business wants 
it. What is good for General Motors may, 
or may not, be good for the country” 
(Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., A Thousand 
Days, 1965). In its current form, the 
proverb comes from testimony given in 
1953 by Charles Erwin Wilson, president 
of General Motors, regarding his nomina-
tion as secretary of defense: “For many 
years I thought what was good for our 
country was good for General Motors, 
and vice versa.” Other words may be sub-
stituted for General Motors and America.
what’s got over the devil’s back is spent 
under his belly  Money that is acquired 
by illicit or immoral means is spent in a 
similar manner: They travel from one resort 
to the next, fl eecing or robbing the tourists by 
day and squandering their ill-gotten gains in 
the bars and brothels by night—what’s got 
over the devil’s back is spent under his belly. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1582 in 
S. Gosson’s Plays Confuted.
Variant of this proverb: nothing goes 
over the back but that comes under the 
belly.
what’s in a name?  The names borne 
by or given to people and things are not 
important: What’s in a name? Why pay $200 
for a jacket with a designer label when you can 
buy one of the same—if not better—quality 
for half the price? The proverb comes from 
what’s done cannot be undone
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   292 1/29/07   5:13:07 PM
293
Shakespeare’s play Romeo and Juliet (2:2), 
“What’s in a name? that which we call a 
rose/By any other name would smell as 
sweet.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a rose by any other name would smell 
as sweet.
what’s new cannot be true  People 
are always skeptical about new ideas: 
Throughout the ages, scientists and inventors 
have struggled against the popular miscon-
ception that what’s new cannot be true. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, in 1639 in J. Clarke’s Parœmiolo-
gia Anglo-Latina.
what’s past is prologue  Everything that 
has gone before is just the introduction 
to what is still to come: “A century and a 
quarter. A long time for any commercial 
entity, and something to take pride in. 
And we do, while bearing in mind that 
‘what’s past is prologue.’ It’s the next 125 
years that really count” (New York Times, 
1991). The proverb comes from Shake-
speare’s play The Tempest (2:1; 1611), 
“We all were sea-swallow’d, though 
some cast again,/And by that destiny to 
perform an act/Whereof what’s past is 
prologue, what to come/In yours and 
my discharge.”
what’s sauce for the goose is sauce for 
the gander  What is appropriate for one 
person is equally appropriate for another 
person in a similar situation; sometimes 
used in the context of sexual equality: If 
smoking is to be banned on the factory fl oor, 
then it should also be banned in the board-
room—what’s sauce for the goose is sauce for 
the gander. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1670 in John Ray’s English Proverbs.
what’s yours is mine, and what’s mine is 
my own  People often expect free use 
of what belongs to others while refusing 
to share their own property: My husband’s 
salary will be paid into our joint account, and 
I have set up a separate account for my own 
earnings. This is just to simplify my business 
affairs, as I’m self-employed—I have assured 
my husband that it is not a case of “What’s 
yours is mine, and what’s mine is my own”! 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1591. 
It is a facetious alteration of the less selfi sh 
notion “What’s yours is mine, and what’s 
mine is yours,” associated with the sharing 
of money and possessions in marriage.
Variant of this proverb: what’s yours 
is mine, and what’s mine is mine.
what the eye doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t 
grieve over  Nobody can be upset by 
something that he or she is unaware of: He 
tried to exculpate himself by concealing all the 
evidence from his wife and saying, “What the 
eye doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t grieve over.” 
The proverb dates from before the 12th 
century, when it was used in a sermon by 
Saint Bernard: “Quod non videt oculus cor 
non dolet [What the eye sees not, the heart 
does not grieve at].”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
admiration is the daughter of igno-
rance; what you don’t know can’t 
hurt you.
what the soldier said isn’t evi-
dence  Gossip, hearsay, and rumor are 
not reliable sources of the truth: You need 
more than a secondhand account from an eye-
witness to prove your case—what the soldier 
said isn’t evidence. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1837, in Charles Dickens’s 
novel The Pickwick Papers: “‘You must not 
tell us what the soldier, or any other man, 
 what the soldier said isn’t evidence
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   293 1/29/07   5:13:07 PM
294
said, sir,’ interposed the judge; ‘it’s not 
evidence.’”
what will be, will be  What is destined 
to happen cannot be prevented: There’s no 
point in worrying about the future—what will 
be, will be. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): 
“Whan a thyng is shapen, it shal be.” It is 
sometimes quoted in its Italian form, “Che 
sarà, sarà,” which was popularized in the 
mid-20th century as a line from the song 
“Whatever Will Be Will Be.”
Variant of this proverb: what must 
be, must be.
what you don’t know can’t hurt you  It 
is often better to remain in ignorance 
of things that could distress you: I 
decided that it would be wiser—and perhaps 
kinder—not to tell my parents the whole 
story of what happened that night, on the 
basis of the saying “What you don’t know 
can’t hurt you.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1576 in G. Pettie’s Petit 
Palace.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: ignorance is bliss; what the eye 
doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t grieve 
over.
what you lose on the swings you gain 
on the roundabouts  Gains and losses 
tend to balance one another overall: 
Their delivery charges are higher, but their 
prices are lower—what you lose on the swings 
you gain on the roundabouts. The proverb 
comes from Patrick Reginald Chalmers’s 
poem “Roundabouts and Swings” (1912): 
“What’s lost upon the roundabouts we 
pulls up on the swings!” It has given 
rise to the fi gurative phrase swings and 
roundabouts.
Variant of this proverb: what you 
gain on the swings you lose on the round-
abouts.
what you put off and what you put on, 
never change till May be gone  See 
ne’er cast a clout till may be out.
what you see is what you get  Things 
or people are exactly as they seem; 
used to imply honesty, straightforward-
ness, etc.: “‘My wife says I’m the most 
uncomplicated man in the world,’ Duka-
kis admits. ‘I guess I am.’ Even his 
83-year-old mother says of him, ‘What 
you see is what you get’” (Time, 1987). 
First recorded in 1971, the proverb has 
acquired a specialized use (abbreviated 
to WYSIWYG) in the world of comput-
ing, where it means “What you see on 
the screen is exactly what you will get 
on the printout.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: appearances are deceiving.
what you’ve never had you never 
miss  People do not feel the lack of 
something they have never possessed or 
enjoyed: “I castrate the male lambs . . . 
about an hour after they have been born. 
They say what you’ve never had, you 
never miss” (Ronald Blythe, Akenfi eld, 
1969). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1912 in Jean Webster’s Daddy Long-Legs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t lose what you never had.
the wheel comes full circle  Things 
eventually reach a situation resembling 
that from which they began: The word 
originally meant “foolish” or “ignorant,” but 
over the centuries it lost its derogatory con-
notations and came to mean “amusing” or 
what will be, will be
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   294 1/29/07   5:13:07 PM
295
“pleasant.” However, the wheel comes full 
circle, and the word is now used as an 
expression of contempt. The proverb comes 
from Shakespeare’s play King Lear (5:3; 
1605), “The wheel is come full circle: 
I am here.”
the wheel of fortune is forever in 
motion  People’s fortunes are constantly 
changing—somebody who has good luck 
one year may have bad luck the next, and 
vice versa: It seemed that nothing could go 
wrong, but the wheel of fortune is forever in 
motion, and disaster struck the following day. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1748 in 
Papers of Benjamin Franklin.
the wheel that does the squeaking is 
the one that gets the grease  See the 
squeaky wheel gets the grease.
when Adam delved and Eve span, who 
was then the gentleman?  The class sys-
tem has not always existed and is therefore 
invalid or irrelevant: “‘On what grounds 
do they hold us in vassalage? Do not we all 
come from the same father and mother, 
Adam and Eve?’ The spirit of individual 
freedom breathed itself out in the effec-
tive rhyme, which ran like wildfi re, ‘When 
Adam delved and Eve span/Who was then 
the gentleman?’” (Philip Schaff, History 
of the Christian Church, 1883–1893). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1340 in the 
form “When Adam delved and Eve span, 
where was then the pride of man?” (The 
word delved is archaic for “dug” and “span” 
the archaic past tense of spin.) It was asso-
ciated with the period of social unrest in 
England that culminated in the Peasants’ 
Revolt (1381).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
jack’s as good as his master.
when a dog bites a man, that is not 
news; but when a man bites a dog, that 
is news  The media are only interested 
in unusual or outrageous stories: Need-
less to say, the photos that appeared in all 
the papers the following day were not of the 
president making his historic speech, but of 
him falling down the steps as he left the stage 
afterward. When a dog bites a man, that is 
not news; but when a man bites a dog, that 
is news. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1880, by John B. Bogart in The New 
York Sun.
when all fruit fails, welcome haws  We 
must accept with gratitude whatever 
is available, even if it is not exactly 
what we want or need: “So even the 
excommunicated will do, when it’s not 
easy to get anyone else. When all fruit 
fails, welcome haws” (Brendan Behan, 
Borstal Boy, 1958). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1721 in James Kelly, Scottish 
Proverbs. The haw is the berry of the haw-
thorn: When there is no fruit generally, 
even hawthorn berries are to be gladly 
received.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
beggars can’t be choosers.
when all you have is a hammer, every-
thing looks like a nail  People with 
a restricted range of knowledge or 
options often try to apply the same 
solution to every problem: “That kind 
of crude misapplication of PCs and 
PC software—the computer world’s 
equivalent of the old saw that ‘when all 
you have is a hammer, everything starts 
to look like a nail’—means death for 
productivity” (PC Magazine, 1989). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1981 in 
the New York Times.
 when all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   295 1/29/07   5:13:07 PM
296
when a man’s single, his pockets will jin-
gle  Unmarried men have more money 
than those who have a wife and family 
to support: When a man’s single, his pockets 
will jingle, but money isn’t everything, and a 
bachelor’s life can be a lonely one.
when Greek meets Greek, then comes 
the tug of war  A contest or struggle 
between equally matched opponents is a 
long and fi erce battle: There is no prospect 
of an early end to the dispute, both sides hav-
ing considerable support from different sectors 
of the general public—when Greek meets 
Greek, then comes the tug of war. The prov-
erb comes from Nathaniel Lee’s play The 
Rival Queens (1477), about the latter years 
of Alexander the Great: “When Greeks 
joined Greeks, then was the tug of war!”
when house and land are gone and spent, 
then learning is most excellent  It is 
important to have a good education to 
fall back on if you lose or use up all your 
money and material assets: My earnings as 
a child model had provided me with at very 
comfortable nest egg, but my parents urged me 
not to abandon my studies, on the principle that 
“When house and land are gone and spent, then 
learning is most excellent.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1752 in S. Foote’s Taste.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: learning is better than house 
or land.
when in doubt, do nothing  If you are 
unsure what to do, it is best to do noth-
ing at all: I thought I heard a scream, and 
wondered if I should call the police, go and 
investigate, or follow the age-old wisdom of 
“When in doubt, do nothing.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in George John Whyte-
Melville’s novel Uncle John (1874): “When 
in doubt what to do, he is a wise man who 
does nothing.”
Variant of this proverb: when in 
doubt, leave it out.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: between two stools one falls to 
the ground.
when in Rome, do as the Romans do 
You should always follow the customs, 
rules, and laws of the place where you 
are: I don’t like kissing total strangers, but 
in this country it’s considered impolite not to, 
and when in Rome we must do as the Romans 
do. The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 
1475, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
much earlier origin, and has been attrib-
uted to Saint Ambrose (c. 339–a.d. 97).
Variant of this proverb: when you 
are at Rome, do as Rome does.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
so many countries, so many customs.
when one door closes, another one 
opens  Disappointment or failure is 
usually followed by a new opportunity: I 
didn’t get a part in the musical, but the next 
day’s mail brought an offer of a recording 
contract—when one door closes, another one 
opens. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1586 in D. Rowland’s Lazarillo.
Variant of this proverb: when one 
door shuts, another opens.
when poverty comes in at the door, 
love fl ies out of the window  Financial 
problems can cause the breakdown of a 
marriage or other loving relationship: 
They lived together for fi ve blissfully happy 
years, until their money ran out. Then they 
began to learn the truth of the proverb “When 
poverty comes in at the door, love fl ies out of 
the window.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
when a man’s single, his pockets will jingle
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   296 1/29/07   5:13:07 PM
297
in 1631, in R. Brathwait’s English Gentle-
woman: “It hath been an old Maxime: that 
as pouerty goes in at one doore, loue goes 
out at the other.”
Variant of this proverb: when the 
wolf comes in at the door, love creeps out 
of the window.
when the cat’s away, the mice will 
play  People do as they please in the 
absence of those in authority: “Monsieur 
Grandet entered the room, threw his 
keen eye upon the table, upon Charles, 
and saw the whole thing. ‘Ha! ha! so 
you have been making a feast for your 
nephew; very good, very good, very good 
indeed!’ he said. . . . ‘When the cat’s away, 
the mice will play’” (Honoré de Balzac, 
Eugenie Grandet, 1833). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1607, but with the impli-
cation that it had long been in use. There 
is evidence of a French version, “Ou chat 
na rat regne [Where there is no cat, the rat 
reigns],” in the early 14th century.
when the going gets tough, the tough get 
going  In times of crisis, those who are 
most resilient and determined take action 
and prove their worth: You give up far too 
easily—have you never heard the saying “When 
the going gets tough, the tough get going”? The 
proverb is attributed to the United States 
businessman and diplomat Joseph P. Ken-
nedy (1888–1969), father of President John 
F. Kennedy. It is sometimes used facetiously 
to convey the opposite meaning, with get 
going in the sense of “run away.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
calamity is the touchstone of a brave 
mind.
when the wind is in the east, ’tis neither 
good for man nor beast  An easterly 
wind, which is often piercing and cold, is 
the worst of all: “When the wind’s in the 
East, It’s neither good for man nor beast 
. . . The East-wind with us is commonly 
very sharp, because it comes off the Conti-
nent” (John Ray, A Collection of English Prov-
erbs, 1670). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1600 in R. Cawdrey’s Treasury of Similes.
when the wine is in, the wit is out  Peo-
ple say foolish things when they are 
drunk: “You were talking nonsense at the 
dinner table last night.” “Well, you know what 
they say—when the wine is in, the wit is out.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1390 in 
John Gower’s Confessio Amantis.
when the wolf comes in at the door, love 
creeps out of the window  See when 
poverty comes in at the door, love flies 
out of the window.
when the worst comes, the worst is 
going  See when things are at the 
worst they begin to mend.
when thieves fall out, honest men come 
by their own  A dispute between crimi-
nals is to the advantage of their victims, 
either because they betray one another and 
reveal the truth, or because they are too 
busy arguing to commit the crime in the 
fi rst place: When thieves fall out, honest men 
come by their own—dissension within the gang 
led to one of their members making a full confes-
sion, and ultimately to the release of my brother, 
who had been wrongfully convicted of the crime. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546.
Variant of this proverb: when thieves 
fall out, honest men get their due.
when things are at the worst they begin 
to mend  When things cannot get any 
 when things are at the worst they begin to mend
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   297 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
298
worse, they begin to get better: “‘I have 
heard about it, miss,’ said Dolly, ‘and it’s 
very sad indeed, but when things are at the 
worst they are sure to mend.’ ‘But are you 
sure they are at the worst?’ asked Emma 
with a smile. ‘Why, I don’t see how they can 
very well be more unpromising than they 
are; I really don’t,’ said Dolly” (Charles 
Dickens, Barnaby Rudge, 1841). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1582 in G. Whet-
stone’s Heptameron of Civil Discourses.
Variant of this proverb: when the 
worst comes, the worst is going.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: after a storm comes a calm; the 
darkest hour is just before dawn.
when two ride one horse, one must sit 
behind  See if two ride on a horse, 
one must ride behind.
when you are at Rome, do as Rome 
does  See when in rome, do as the 
romans do.
when you are in a hole, stop digging 
When you have landed yourself in trou-
ble, such as through a foolish remark 
or action, do not say or do anything to 
make the situation worse: “Until now 
the president has ignored the fi rst law of 
politics: When you get yourself in a hole, 
stop digging” (Houston Chronicle, 1993). 
First recorded in 1988, the proverb is 
attributed to the British politician Denis 
Healey (1917–  ).
when you argue with a fool, make sure he 
isn’t similarly engaged  Do not assume 
that you are more intelligent or knowl-
edgeable than the person you are arguing 
with: It is better not to enter into a dispute 
unless you are certain of the facts—remember 
the saying “When you argue with a fool, make 
sure he isn’t similarly engaged.”
when you go to dance, take heed whom 
you take by the hand  Beware of getting 
involved with dishonest or unscrupulous 
people: It may sound like an unmissable 
business opportunity, but make sure this guy 
is on the level before you sign anything. As 
my grandmother used to say, “When you go to 
dance, take heed whom you take by the hand.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1621 in 
Bartholomew Robinson’s Adagia in Latin 
and English.
where bees are, there is honey  Wher-
ever there are industrious people, wealth 
is produced; also used of other types of 
people whose presence is indicative or 
suggestive of something: The company has 
done well not through good fortune, but through 
the hard work of everybody involved—where 
bees are, there is honey. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1616 in T. Draxe’s Adages.
Variant of this proverb: where there 
are bees, there is honey.
where God builds a church, the devil 
will build a chapel  Any force for good, 
such as progress or reform, is inevitably 
accompanied—or closely followed—by 
something bad; not exclusively used in 
religious contexts: “But, human sin and 
imperfection enter into all great move-
ments of history. Wherever God builds a 
church, the Devil is sure to build a cha-
pel close by” (Philip Schaff, History of the 
Christian Church, 1883–1893). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1560. In his satiri-
cal poem “The True-Born Englishman” 
(1701), Daniel Defoe wrote, “Wherever 
God erects a House of Prayer,/The Devil 
always builds a Chapel there:/And ’twill 
when two ride one horse, one must sit behind
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   298 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
299
be found upon Examination,/The latter 
has the largest congregation.”
Variant of this proverb: where God 
has a church, the devil has a chapel.
where ignorance is bliss, ’tis folly to be 
wise  See ignorance is bliss.
where the carcass is, there will the 
eagles be gathered  People are drawn 
together, or to a particular place, when 
they think they will gain something to 
their advantage: “he explained his appear-
ance at the inquest on the twin lines of 
busman’s holiday and that where the car-
cass is there will the vultures be gathered 
together” (Christopher Bush, The Perfect 
Murder Case, 1929). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “For wheresoever the car-
case is, there will the eagles be gathered 
together” (Matthew 24:28). The word 
eagles is sometimes replaced by vultures, as 
in the quotation.
where there are bees, there is honey  See 
where bees are, there is honey.
where there’s a will there’s a way  If 
you are suffi ciently determined to achieve 
something, then you will fi nd a way of 
doing so: It won’t be an easy task, but where 
there’s a will there’s a way. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1640 in the form “To 
him that will, ways are not wanting.” The 
U.S. writer Ambrose Bierce parodied the 
proverb in his Devil’s Dictionary (1911): 
“Where there’s a will there’s a won’t.” 
Other facetious variants, punning on the 
word will, include “Where there’s a will 
there’s a lawsuit” and “Where there’s a 
will there’s relatives.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: he who wills the end, wills the 
means; nothing is impossible to a 
willing heart.
where there’s life there’s hope  See 
while there’s life there’s hope.
where there’s muck there’s brass  There 
is often money to be made wherever 
there is muck or dirt of some kind: It may 
be surprising to many to learn that there are 
millionaires in the refuse-disposal business, but 
where there’s muck there’s brass. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1678 in John Ray’s 
A Collection of English Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: where there’s 
muck there’s money.
where there’s no vision, the people per-
ish  People need hopes and dreams to 
sustain them: “I hope no one ever tries 
to raise a child without a vision. I hope 
nobody ever starts a business or plants a 
crop in the ground without a vision. For 
where there is no vision, the people per-
ish” (Bill Clinton, New York Times, 1992). 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Where 
there is no vision, the people perish: but 
he that keepeth the law, happy is he” (Prov-
erbs 29:18).
where there’s smoke, there’s fi re  See 
there’s no smoke without fire.
where the tree falls, there it shall lie  See 
as a tree falls, so shall it lie.
which came fi rst, the chicken or the 
egg?  It is sometimes diffi cult to dis-
tinguish between cause and effect: Which 
came fi rst, the chicken or the egg? Did the 
town develop because of the railroad, or was 
the railroad brought here because it was a 
developing town?
 which came fi rst, the chicken or the egg?
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   299 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
300
while the grass grows, the steed 
starves  If somebody has to wait a long 
time for something, it may arrive too late 
to be of use: “I shall sell them next year fast 
enough, after my one-man-show; but while 
the grass grows the steed starves” (George 
Bernard Shaw, The Doctor’s Dilemma, 1906). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1350 in 
the form “While the grass grows, the good 
horse starves.” It occurs in Shakespeare’s 
play Hamlet (3:2; 1600–01), in an exchange 
between Hamlet and Rosencrantz: “‘Sir, I 
lack advancement.’ ‘How can that be when 
you have the voice of the King himself for 
your succession in Denmark?’ ‘Ay, sir, but 
“While the grass grows . . .”—the proverb 
is something musty.’”
Variant of this proverb: while the 
grass grows, the horse starves.
while there’s life there’s hope  Do not 
give up hope while there is the remotest 
possibility of survival, improvement, or 
success: “I will be pleasantly surprised if 
corporate America acts on your ‘wake-up 
call’—but where there’s life there’s hope” 
(Washington Times, 1996). First recorded 
in English in 1539, the proverb is of 
ancient origin, occurring in the writings 
of Cicero (106–43 b.c.): “dum anima est 
spes esse dicitur [as the saying is, while 
there’s life there’s hope].”
Variant of this proverb: where there’s 
life there’s hope.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never say die.
while two dogs are fi ghting for a bone, 
a third runs away with it  When two 
parties are engaged in a dispute, their 
attention is distracted from what is going 
on around them, and both may end up 
as losers: The larger suppliers were so busy 
trying to underbid each other for the contract, 
they failed to notice that their customer had 
entered into negotiations with another smaller 
company—while two dogs are fi ghting for a 
bone, a third runs away with it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1639, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin, occurring in Chaucer’s Canterbury 
Tales (c. 1390).
Variant of this proverb: two dogs 
fi ght over a bone while a third runs away 
with it.
whiskey and gasoline don’t mix  Do not 
drive an automobile after drinking alco-
hol: The tables have been turned, and young 
people are now warning their parents that 
whiskey and gasoline don’t mix.
Variant of this proverb: gasoline and 
whiskey don’t mix.
a whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men  Females 
should not do things that are traditionally 
associated with males—it is men who 
whistle and cocks that crow, not women 
and hens; also interpreted more literally: 
Whistling softly to herself as she went about 
her work, she became aware that her grandfa-
ther was looking at her with stern disapproval. 
“A whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men,” he snapped. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1850, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: a whistling 
girl and a crowing hen always come to the 
same bad end.
a white wall is the fool’s writing 
paper  Only foolish people write on 
walls: It is said that a white wall is the fool’s 
writing paper, but there are occasional nug-
while the grass grows, the steed starves
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   300 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
301
gets of wisdom to be found in the graffi ti that 
adorns the walls of the college lavatories. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1573 in 
James Sanford’s The Garden of Pleasure.
who excuses himself accuses him-
self  See he who excuses himself 
accuses himself.
who has land has war  There will always 
be disputes over the ownership of land; 
also used of larger territorial disputes: 
The saying “Who has land has war” is quite 
true—I’ve lost thousands of dollars in legal 
battles since I bought this ranch. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1579, but with the 
implication that it was already in com-
mon use.
who knows most, speaks least  Wise or 
knowledgeable people say little: Don’t be 
misled by her reserved manner—who knows 
most, speaks least. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
those who know don’t speak; those 
who speak don’t know.
whom the gods love die young  Pre-
mature death is a sign that somebody 
is worthy of divine favor because of 
great talent or virtue; also used to 
imply that it is better not to live long: 
“Thrice fortunate! who of that frag-
ile mould,/The precious porcelain of 
human clay,/Break with the first fall 
. . ./‘Whom the gods love die young,’ 
was said of yore,/And many deaths 
do they escape by this:/The death 
of friends, and that which slays even 
more—/The death of friendship, love, 
youth, all that is” (Lord Byron, Don 
Juan, 1819). The proverb is of ancient 
origin, occurring in the writings of the 
Greek poet and dramatist Menander 
(c. 342–292 b.c.).
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
god takes soonest those he loveth 
best; the good die young.
whom the gods would destroy, they fi rst 
make mad  Those who commit acts of 
great folly are heading for disaster, the 
implication being that such people lose 
their sanity or good sense because they 
are destined for this end: The company’s 
decision to pull out of such a lucrative market 
was nothing short of lunacy, but whom the 
gods would destroy they fi rst make mad. The 
sentiment expressed by the proverb is of 
ancient origin. The critic Cyril Connolly 
parodied the proverb in Enemies of Promise 
(1938): “Whom the gods wish to destroy 
they fi rst call promising.”
who repairs not his gutters repairs his 
whole house  Those who neglect small 
repairs will fi nd they have to make much 
bigger ones later: It is easy to put aside rou-
tine maintenance jobs, but he who repairs not 
his gutters repairs his whole house. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1849 in John 
Ruskin’s The Seven Lamps of Architecture.
Variant of this proverb: he that 
repairs not a part, builds all.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: an ounce of prevention is worth 
a pound of cure; prevention is better 
than cure; a stitch in time saves nine.
who says A must say B  If you say or do 
one thing, you must be prepared to say 
or do what logically follows: “But who 
says ‘A’ must say ‘B.’ . . . You can’t talk 
about victims and caring and knowing 
 who says A must say B
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   301 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
302
cows individually while, at the same time, 
you treat carrots as nobodies!” (Washing-
ton Times, 1988). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1838 in the form “If you say 
A, they’ll make you say B.”
Variant of this proverb: never say A 
without saying B.
whose bread I eat, his song I sing  Peo-
ple show loyalty to, or comply with the 
demands of, those who employ, pay, or 
feed them: Unsurprisingly, her views on the 
subject are the same as those already expressed 
by her sponsors—whose bread I eat, his song 
I sing.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he who pays the piper calls the tune.
whosoever draws his sword against 
the prince must throw the scabbard 
away  Those who overthrow a ruler or 
government must be constantly ready to 
defend themselves against a retaliatory 
or counterrevolutionary act: The rebels 
will never be able to live in peace—whosoever 
draws his sword against the prince must throw 
the scabbard away. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1604 in R. Dallington’s View 
of France.
who won’t be ruled by the rudder must 
be ruled by the rock  Those who refuse 
to be guided by reason, advice, or instruc-
tions are heading for disaster: They ignored 
all our warnings, and now they must face the 
consequences—who won’t be ruled by the rud-
der must be ruled by the rock. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1666, in an Italian 
proverb collection.
why buy the cow when you can get the 
milk for free?  There is no point in tak-
ing on the expense and responsibility of a 
wife and family when you can fulfi ll your 
sexual and other needs through casual 
relationships; also used in other contexts: 
Jack has no shortage of girlfriends, but he has 
no plans to marry any of them. As he says, “Why 
buy a cow when you can get the milk for free?” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, with dif-
ferent wording, in 1659 in James Howell, 
Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: why buy the 
cow when milk is so cheap?
why keep a dog and bark yourself?  If 
you employ somebody to do something 
for you, there is no point in doing it your-
self: I don’t add up the fi gures—that’s my 
accountant’s job. Why keep a dog and bark 
yourself? The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1583 in B. Melbancke’s Philotimus.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: if you would be well served, serve 
yourself.
why should the devil have all the best 
tunes?  Secular songs often have more 
catchy melodies than traditional religious 
music; used as justifi cation for making 
hymn tunes more acceptable to popular 
taste: “The Primitive Methodists . . . act-
ing upon the principle of ‘Why should the 
devil have all the pretty tunes?’ collect 
the airs which are sung at pot and public 
houses, and write their hymns to them” 
(William Chappell, Popular Music of the 
Olden Time, 1859). The quotation is the 
fi rst recorded use of the proverb, which is 
attributed to the British evangelist Rowland 
Hill (1744–1833).
a willful man must have his way  Stub-
born people will do as they please, so 
there is no point in arguing with them: 
I have tried to persuade my father to come 
whose bread I eat, his song I sing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   302 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
303
and live with us, but I seem to be wasting my 
breath—a willful man must have his way. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1816, in Sir 
Walter Scott’s novel The Antiquary.
willful waste makes woeful want  Reck-
less extravagance leads to dire need: “Now 
young folks go off to Paris, and think noth-
ing of the cost: and it’s well if wilful waste 
don’t make woeful want before they die” 
(Elizabeth Gaskell, Wives and Daughters, 
1866). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1721, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
waste not, want not.
the willing horse carries the load  Peo-
ple tend to take advantage of those who 
never complain or refuse: The willing 
horse carries the load, and she often fi nds her-
self working several hours a week longer than 
her less obliging colleagues. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in 1546 in John Heywood’s Dialogue 
of Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: all lay loads 
on the willing horse.
wine has drowned more men than the 
sea  Overindulgence in alcohol can be 
fatal: If you must drink, do so in modera-
tion—wine has drowned more men than the 
sea. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1669 in Politeuphuia.
wink at small faults  Let trivial offenses 
go unpunished. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1598 in William Shake-
speare’s Henry V (2:2): “If little faults 
. . . shall not be wink’d at, how shall we 
stretch our eye when capital crimes . . . 
appear before us?”
a winner never quits, and a quitter never 
wins  You need determination and perse-
verance if you want to succeed: I urged her 
not to give up, reminding her of the saying “A 
winner never quits, and a quitter never wins.”
the winners laugh, the losers weep  See 
let them laugh that win.
winning isn’t everything, it’s the only 
thing  In any competitive situation, 
winning is the only thing that mat-
ters; sometimes said in response to the 
remark “Winning isn’t everything,” or 
used to encourage single-mindedness in 
sportspeople: She was one of those ambi-
tious young lawyers for whom winning isn’t 
everything, it’s the only thing. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1953. It is often 
attributed to the U.S. football coach 
Vince Lombardi, who made a similar 
remark in 1962.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: it’s not whether you win or lose, 
but how you play the game.
winter fi nds out what summer lays up 
When things go awry, that is the time 
when the extent of any resources is tested: 
“Winter draws out what summer laid in” 
(Thomas Fuller, Gnomologia, 1732). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1460 in Good 
Wyf wold a Pylgremage.
wisdom goes beyond strength  Intelli-
gence always outmatches brute strength: 
David’s victory over Goliath merely illustrates 
the truth behind the maxim “wisdom goes 
beyond strength.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1616 in T. Draxe’s Bibliotheca 
Scholastica.
Variant of this proverb: use brains 
not brawn.
 wisdom goes beyond strength
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   303 1/29/07   5:13:09 PM
304
wisdom is better than rubies  Wisdom 
is a highly desirable and very precious 
attribute, more valuable than riches: My 
father was not a wealthy man, but he was very 
wise, and wisdom is better than rubies. The 
proverb is of biblical origin: “For wisdom 
is better than rubies; and all the things 
that may be desired are not to be com-
pared to it” (Proverbs 8:11).
Variant of this proverb: wisdom is 
better than wealth.
a wise lawyer never goes to law him-
self  Those who practice the law and 
understand the costs involved know better 
than to rely upon it themselves. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1642 in G. Torriano’s 
Select Italian Proverbs.
a wise man changes his mind, but a fool 
never does  It is foolish to persist in the 
same opinion or course of action regard-
less of new information or different cir-
cumstances: Accused of making a U-turn in 
policy, the mayor calmly replied, “A wise man 
changes his mind, but a fool never does.” The 
sentiment expressed by the proverb occurs 
in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “No 
folie to chaunge counseil whan the thyng 
is chaunged.”
a wise man is never less alone than when 
alone  An intelligent person has his or 
her own thoughts for company: She did 
not worry about leaving the professor on his 
own, for he had often told her that a wise 
man is never less alone than when alone. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1581 in George Pettie’s Guazzo’s Civil 
Conversation but is of much older, Roman 
origin and is sometimes attributed to 
Scipio Africanus the Elder or otherwise 
to Themistocles.
wise men learn by other men’s mistakes, 
fools by their own  See learn from the 
mistakes of others.
wishes won’t wash dishes  Merely wish-
ing that something was done is not enough 
to get it done. The proverb appears to be a 
relatively recent U.S. introduction dating 
from the 20th century, although similar 
sentiments have been expressed in variant 
forms since the 17th century.
Variant of this proverb: wishes never 
can fi ll a sack.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if wishes were horses, beggars would 
ride.
the wish is father to the thought  Our 
beliefs and expectations are infl uenced by 
what we want or hope to be true: I think 
she’s looking better this morning, but perhaps 
the wish is father to the thought. The proverb 
comes from Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, 
Part 2 (4:5), “Thy wish was father, Harry, 
to that thought.”
with age comes wisdom  People become 
more sensible and knowledgeable as they 
get older: With age comes wisdom, which is 
perhaps why older drivers have few accidents. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1523 in 
Erasmus’s Adagia.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: an old fox is not easily snared; 
time is the rider that breaks youth.
with friends like that, who needs 
enemies?  Treacherous or disloyal friends 
are worse than enemies: It was one of 
his so-called friends who reported him to the 
police—with friends like that, who needs ene-
mies? The proverb was dates from the early 
20th century.
wisdom is better than rubies
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   304 1/29/07   5:13:09 PM
305
Variant of this proverb: with such 
friends, one hardly needs enemies.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
save us from our friends.
a woman’s work is never done  The 
household tasks traditionally assigned to 
women—cooking, cleaning, and so on—
seem endless because they are repeated 
day after day: I was still ironing at mid-
night—a woman’s work is never done! The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in Thomas 
Tusser’s Hundred Good Points of Husbandry 
(1570) in the form “Some respite to 
husbands the weather doth send, but hus-
wives affaires have never none ende.”
Variant of this proverb: man’s work 
lasts till set of sun, woman’s work is never 
done.
a wonder lasts but nine days  Sensa-
tional events are usually entirely forgot-
ten after a short time: “These few days’ 
wonder will be quickly worn” (William 
Shakespeare, Henry VI (2:1). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1374 in Geoffrey 
Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde. The proverb 
is often referred to in the abbreviated 
form “a nine-day wonder.”
wonders will never cease!  Amazing 
things are constantly happening; often used 
ironically: I hear she actually admitted that she 
had made a mistake—wonders will never cease! 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1776 in T. 
Boaden’s Private Correspondence of D. Garrick.
Variant of this proverb: wonders 
never cease!
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the age of miracles is past.
a word is enough to the wise  See a 
word to the wise is sufficient.
a word spoken is past recalling  You 
cannot take back what you have said, so 
think carefully before speaking: I immedi-
ately regretted making such a hurtful remark, 
but a word spoken is past recalling. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1509 in 
the form “A word once spoken cannot be 
revoked,” but the sentiment it expresses is 
of ancient origin.
Variant of this proverb: words once 
spoken you can never recall.  Prov-
erb expressing similar meaning: think 
before you speak.
a word to the wise is suffi cient  It is 
not necessary to explain things in detail 
to intelligent people; often used when 
dropping a subtle hint or making a cryptic 
remark: He mentioned that four of the compa-
ny’s directors had just resigned, and a word to 
the wise is suffi cient—I’m going to invest my 
money elsewhere. The proverb is sometimes 
quoted in its Latin form, “Verbum sapienti 
sat est,” often shortened to “verb. sap.” It was 
fi rst recorded in English, with different 
wording, in 1570.
Variant of this proverb: a word is 
enough to the wise.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a nod’s as good as a wink to a blind 
horse.
work before play  Tasks and chores must 
be completed before we can relax and 
enjoy ourselves: Work before play—you’re 
not going anywhere until all these dishes are 
washed and dried!
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
business before pleasure.
work expands so as to fi ll the time 
available for its completion  Any task, 
however small, will use up all the time 
 work expands so as to fi ll the time available for its completion
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   305 1/29/07   5:13:09 PM
306
available for it, because it is done more 
slowly than necessary, or because it gives 
rise to extra work: “I can’t believe it took you 
all afternoon to write one letter.” “Well, I didn’t 
have anything else to do, and work expands 
to fi ll the time available.” The proverb is 
known as Parkinson’s Law, named for the 
British historian C. Northcote Parkinson 
(1909–93), who coined it in 1955. A 
similar observation has been made about 
the tendency of objects to multiply until 
they occupy all the available space.
work never hurt anybody  Work will 
not do you any harm, and may do you 
some good; often said to those who are 
idle or lazy: When I complained to my son’s 
employer about the long hours he was expected 
to do, I got the curt reply, “Work never hurt 
anybody.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1879 in Dinah Maria Mulock’s Young 
Mrs. Jardine.
Variant of this proverb: hard work 
never hurt anybody.
the world is a stage and all the people in 
it actors  See all the world’s a stage.
the world runs on wheels  Daily events 
are unceasing and happen at a rapid pace: 
“The world runs all on wheels. All things 
therein move without intermission” (John 
Florio, translation of Montaigne, 1603). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in 
John Heywood’s A Dialogue containing . . . 
the Proverbs in the English Tongue.
the worm will turn  See even a worm 
will turn.
worry is interest paid on trouble before 
it falls due  Do not add to the stress 
of everyday life by worrying about the 
future: You won’t catch me losing sleep over 
problems that may never happen—worry is 
interest paid on trouble before it falls due. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1924 in 
Judge Magazine.
worry kills more men than work  See 
it’s not work that kills, but worry.
worse things happen at sea  This pres-
ent misfortune, though regrettable, 
could have been worse: We shall have 
to give the show a miss, but never mind, 
worse things happen at sea. The proverb 
was first recorded in 1869 in Charles 
Spurgeon’s John Ploughman’s Talk. The 
proverb has long since acquired the 
status of a cliché.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: into every life a little rain must 
fall; it’s an ill wind that blows nobody 
any good.
the worst is yet to come  Things are 
not as bad as they can and will be: The 
mild weather we have been enjoying for 
the past few days does not mean winter is 
over—meteorologists are warning that the 
worst is yet to come. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in Tennyson’s poem “Sea 
Dreams” (1860): “His deeds yet live, 
the worst is yet to come./ Yet let your 
sleep for this one night be sound:/I do 
forgive him!”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the best is yet to be.
the worth of a thing is what it will 
bring  A thing is worth no more 
than somebody is willing to pay for it: 
She claimed that the painting was worth 
$100,000, but the worth of a thing is what it 
will bring, and it has just been sold at auction 
work never hurt anybody
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   306 1/29/07   5:13:09 PM
307
for less than half that fi gure. The proverb is 
of Latin or French origin in the form “A 
thing is worth as much as it can be sold 
for.” A rhyming version closer to the cur-
rent form occurs in Samuel Butler’s poem 
Hudibras (1664): “For what is worth in 
any thing,/But so much money as ’twill 
bring?”
 the worth of a thing is what it will bring