308
years know more than books  Expe-
rience is more valuable than academic 
education: “Years know more than books,” 
said the old man, tapping the side of his nose. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in George 
Herbert, Outlandish Proverbs (1640).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
experience is the best teacher; an 
309
ounce of practice is worth a pound 
of precept.
yesterday will not be called again  It is 
impossible to relive the past: “Well, well 
(quoth she) what ever ye now saie, it is 
too late to call again yesterdaie” (J. Hey-
wood, A Dialogue containing . . . the Proverbs 
in the English Tongue, 1546). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in John Skelton, Mag-
nyfycence (1516).
Variant of this proverb: no man can 
call again yesterday.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the mill cannot grind with the 
water that is past; time lost cannot 
be recalled.
you are what you eat  Your diet affects 
your physical and mental well-being; 
often used to promote health food or to 
condemn junk food: “If you are what you 
eat, the survivor of tonight’s world heavy-
weight championship fi ght will have been 
nourished either by sandwiches or sea-
weed” (New York Times, 1992). The proverb 
may be of German origin, but the senti-
ment it expresses occurs in the French 
 gastronome Anthelme Brillat-Savarin’s 
Physiologie du Goût (1825): “Dis-moi ce que 
tu manges, je te dirai ce que tu es [Tell me 
what you eat, and I will tell you what 
you are].”
you buy land, you buy stones; you buy 
meat, you buy bones  When you buy 
something, you must accept any undesir-
able elements that come with it: In the 
past, customers did not object to paying for 
the lumps of earth that clung to the fresh veg-
etables sold on market stalls, on the principle 
that “You buy land, you buy stones; you buy 
meat, you buy bones.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1670 in John Ray’s A Collec-
tion of English Proverbs.
you can catch more fl ies with honey 
than with vinegar  A polite or pleasant 
approach is more effective than rudeness 
or unpleasantness in dealing with people; 
sometimes used to recommend ingratiat-
ing behavior: “Ask his advice frequently, 
and thank him profusely for his wisdom 
and guidance. Remember that old adage 
‘You can catch more fl ies with honey than 
with vinegar’” (Washington Post, 1996). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1666 in 
G. Torriano’s Italian Proverbs. The word 
honey is sometimes replaced by sugar or 
molasses.
Variant of this proverb: honey catches 
more fl ies than vinegar.
you can drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back  It is 
impossible to change your own or another 
person’s character permanently, however 
hard you try; also used of attempts to 
change aspects of the natural world: The say-
ing “You can drive out nature with a pitchfork but 
she keeps on coming back” was never truer than in 
its horticultural sense, as any gardener who has 
done battle with a well-established weed will tell 
you. The proverb originated in the writings 
of the Roman poet Horace (65–8 b.c.).
Variant of this proverb: drive nature 
out of the door and it will return by the 
window.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the leopard can’t change its spots.
you can fool some of the people all of 
the time, and all of the people some of 
the time, but you can’t fool all of the 
people all of the time  It is impossible 
to maintain a deception that will convince 
 you can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people some . . .
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   309 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
310
everybody: A few gullible people were taken 
in, but most soon realized that he was an impos-
tor—you can fool some of the people all of the 
time, and all of the people some of the time, but 
you cannot fool all of the people all of the time. 
The proverb is attributed to Abraham Lin-
coln in its current form, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin.
you can have too much of a good 
thing  An excess of anything, however 
desirable or benefi cial it may be, is not 
good: “Modern liberals feel that a more 
tolerant society is a good thing, and they 
are right. Yet, it is possible to have too 
much of a good thing” (Washington Post, 
1995). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1611, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
earlier origin. In Shakespeare’s play As You 
Like It (4:1), Rosalind asks, “Why then, can 
one desire too much of a good thing?” The 
proverb is sometimes used in its opposite 
form, as in the following quotation from 
Casanova’s Memoirs (1828–38): “I prom-
ised to tell my tale if he thought it would 
not weary him, warning him that it would 
take two hours. ‘One could never have 
too much of a good thing,’ he was kind 
enough to say.”
Variant of this proverb: too much of 
a good thing is worse than none at all.
you can lead a horse to water, but you 
can’t make him drink  You can give 
somebody the opportunity to do some-
thing, but you cannot force him or her 
to do it: “If he is very strongly set against 
the work, perhaps it is better that he 
should take the opportunity there is now 
to break his articles . . . as you know 
you can take a horse to the water, but 
you can’t make him drink” (W. Somerset 
Maugham, Of Human Bondage, 1915). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1175 in Old 
English Homilies. The journalist Dorothy 
Parker (1893–1967), asked to make up a 
sentence containing the word horticulture, 
is said to have punningly replied, “You can 
lead a horticulture, but you can’t make 
her think.”
Variant of this proverb: you can take 
a horse to the water, but you can’t make 
him drink.
you can only die once  Death may be 
a frightening and unpleasant prospect or 
experience, but we can console ourselves 
with the fact that it will never be repeated; 
a fatalistic attitude, as in a life-threatening 
situation: I know it’s a dangerous pastime, but 
you can only die once, and nothing can beat the 
thrill of hurtling down an almost vertical slope 
at more than 100 m.p.h. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded c. 1435. It occurs in Shake-
speare’s play Henry IV, Part 2 (3:2; 1597) in 
the form “A man can die but once.”
you can run, but you can’t hide  It is 
impossible to evade capture, or some 
other undesirable experience, forever: 
They’ll have to face the consequences of their 
actions sooner or later—you can run, but you 
can’t hide. The proverb is attributed to the 
U.S. boxer Joe Louis (1914–81), who is 
said to have remarked, with reference to 
the speed and agility of his opponent Billy 
Conn, “He can run, but he can’t hide.”
you can take a horse to the water, but 
you can’t make him drink  See you can 
lead a horse to water, but you can’t 
make him drink.
you can take the boy out of the coun-
try, but you can’t take the country out 
of the boy  People never lose inborn 
you can have too much of a good thing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   310 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
311
or ingrained characteristics, even after a 
change of environment or situation: “Back 
in the good old days, when eager young 
rubes were descending upon the great 
metropolises in search of fame and for-
tune, it used to be said that you can take the 
boy out of the country but you can’t take 
the country out of the boy” (Washington 
Post, 1987). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1938. The words boy and country may be 
replaced by others, such as girl and city.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
nature passes nurture.
you can’t argue with success  Those who 
succeed must be doing things the right 
way: It’s a rather unconventional approach, but 
it works, and you can’t argue with success.
you can’t be all things to all men  It is 
impossible to do everything that every-
body wants: Politicians naturally want to win 
as many votes as possible, but you can’t be all 
things to all men. The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “To the weak became I as weak, 
that I might gain the weak: I am made all 
things to all men, that I might by all means 
save some” (1 Corinthians 9:22). It is also 
used in the form of the fi gurative phrase 
to be all things to all men.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a friend to all is a friend to 
none; you can’t please everybody.
you can’t beat a man at his own 
game  Do not try to compete with or 
outdo somebody in his or her own fi eld of 
activity, especially if you lack experience 
yourself: They tried to outwit the fraudsters 
with trickery, but soon learned that you can’t 
beat a man at his own game. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1756. It is more 
frequently encountered in the form of the 
fi gurative phrase to beat somebody at his or 
her own game. 
you can’t beat somebody with 
nobody  You cannot win, especially in 
politics, without support: Both candidates 
have been canvassing hard, on the basis that 
you can’t beat somebody with nobody.
you can’t be in two places at the same 
time  See one cannot be in two places 
at once.
you can’t build a church with stumbling 
blocks  Religion cannot be founded on 
doubt and uncertainty: It was questions like 
these that caused the faith of early believers to 
waver—you can’t build a church with stum-
bling blocks.
you can’t catch old birds with chaff 
Experienced people are not easily 
deceived: You can’t catch old birds with 
chaff—I’ve been in this job long enough to 
know when somebody is trying to pull a fast 
one. The proverb was fi rst recorded, with 
different wording, in 1481 in William 
Caxton, Reynard the Fox.
you can’t eat your cake and have it 
too  See you can’t have your cake and 
eat it too.
you can’t fi ght City Hall  Members of 
the general public cannot hope to win 
a dispute or battle with offi cialdom or 
bureaucracy: I thought of making a formal 
complaint, but there seemed little point—you 
can’t fi ght City Hall. The proverb dates 
from the late 17th century.
you can’t fl y with one wing  See a bird 
never flew on one wing.
 you can’t fl y with one wing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   311 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
312
you can’t get a quart into a pint pot  You 
cannot fi t something into too small a 
space; also used more generally of any 
attempt to do the impossible: I would like 
to take more warm clothing, but you can’t get 
a quart into a pint pot, and this is the larg-
est suitcase I have. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1896.
you can’t get blood from a stone  It is 
impossible to get money, help, information, 
or pity from somebody who is unwilling 
or unable to give it to you: “Blood cannot 
be obtained from a stone, neither can any-
thing on account be obtained . . . from Mr. 
Micawber” (Charles Dickens, David Copper-
fi eld, 1850). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1666, in an Italian proverb collection.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t get 
blood from a turnip.
you can’t go home again  You cannot 
return to the past as you remember it: I 
have such happy memories of the time I spent 
there, but things are very different now, and 
you can’t go home again. The proverb was 
coined by the U.S. novelist Thomas Wolfe 
as the title of a book published posthu-
mously in 1940.
you can’t have it both ways  You must 
choose between two mutually exclusive 
alternatives: “But you can’t have it both 
ways. Either the much-vaunted ‘caring 
society’ is a myth, or a complete change 
in the value judgements of the people 
who govern television is needed” (Glasgow 
Herald, 1976). The proverb dates from the 
early 20th century.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a door must be either shut or 
open; you can’t have your cake and 
eat it too.
you can’t have your cake and eat it 
too  You cannot do two mutually incom-
patible things at the same time: You can’t 
have your cake and eat it too—if you want 
your children to lead happy, independent lives 
you must accept that they will not always be 
there when you need them. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in John Heywood’s 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t eat 
your cake and have it too.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t have it both ways.
you can’t keep the birds from fl ying 
over your head, but you can keep them 
from building a nest in your hair  When 
bad things happen—as they inevitably 
will—do not dwell on them or let them 
get to you: It was a devastating blow, but I 
knew that I must pick up the pieces and carry 
on—you can’t keep the birds from fl ying over 
your head, but you can keep them from build-
ing a nest in your hair.
you can’t lose what you never had  Fail-
ure to get something you want is not 
a real loss; also used with reference to 
the loss of something that somebody 
only thinks he or she has: “‘He has broke 
all; there’s half a line and a good hook 
lost.’ ‘I, and a good Trout too.’ ‘Nay, the 
Trout is not lost, for . . . no man can lose 
what he never had’” (Izaak Walton, The 
Compleat Angler, 1676). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
in Christopher Marlowe’s poem Hero and 
Leander, published posthumously in 1598.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t 
lose what you haven’t got.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what you’ve never had you never 
miss.
you can’t get a quart into a pint pot
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   312 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
313
you can’t make an omelette without 
breaking eggs  Sacrifi ces have to be 
made in order to achieve a goal; often 
used to justify an act that causes loss, 
harm, or distress to others: “In war sol-
diers themselves sometimes cried, and 
their relations cried quite often. You 
can’t make an omelette without breaking 
eggs” (L. P. Hartley, The Hireling, 1957). 
Of French origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1859.
you can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s 
ear  You cannot produce anything of good 
quality from poor raw material; often used 
of people: “The proverb says, ‘You can’t 
make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear.’ Well, 
I don’t know about that. I rather think you 
may, if you begin early in life. She has made 
a home out of that old boat, sir, that stone 
and marble couldn’t beat’ (Charles Dick-
ens, David Copperfi eld, 1850). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1518 in A. Barclay’s 
Eclogues: “None can . . . make goodly silke 
of a gotes fl ece [goat’s fl eece].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
garbage in, garbage out.
you can’t make bricks without straw 
You cannot produce anything without the 
necessary materials or resources: “You can 
only acquire really useful general ideas by 
fi rst acquiring particular ideas, and putting 
those particular ideas together. You cannot 
make bricks without straw” (Arnold Ben-
nett, Literary Taste, 1909). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Ye shall no more give the 
people straw to make brick, as heretofore: 
let them go and gather straw for them-
selves” (Exodus 5:7).
you can’t mix business and pleasure  See 
never mix business with pleasure.
you can’t please everybody  It is impos-
sible to do something that everybody 
will approve of: If we reduce the fuel taxes 
we’ll upset the environmentalist lobby, but you 
can’t please everybody. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1472 in E. Paston’s Letter, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of ancient 
origin
Variants of this proverb: you can’t 
please the whole world and his wife; those 
who please everybody please nobody.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t be all things to all men.
you can’t put an old head on young 
shoulders  It is unreasonable to expect 
young people to be as sensible or knowl-
edgeable as their elders: “‘This boy will 
investigate and report to me.’ . . . ‘Aunt 
Rachel, you are certainly very eccentric.’ 
‘I may be, but I am not often deceived.’ 
‘Well, I hope you won’t be this time. The 
boy seems to me a very good boy, but 
you can’t put an old head on young shoul-
ders’” (Horatio Alger, Driven from Home, 
1889). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1591.
Variant of this proverb: there’s no 
putting old heads on young shoulders.
you can’t put a square peg in a round 
hole  Do not give somebody a job for 
which he or she is unsuited or unqualifi ed; 
also used of other situations in which a 
person is a misfi t: There’s no point in asking 
Jack to take over responsibility for the company 
website—he has no aptitude for or interest 
in computing, and you can’t put a square 
peg in a round hole. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in the early 19th century. It is 
more frequently encountered in the form 
of the cliché a square peg in a round hole (or 
a round peg in a square hole).
 you can’t put a square peg in a round hole
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   313 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
314
Variant of this proverb: you can’t put 
a round peg in a square hole.
you can’t put new wine in old bot-
tles  The introduction of new meth-
ods, ideas, items, or components into 
something old and well established—or 
old and decrepit—can have disastrous 
consequences: You can’t put new wine in old 
bottles, and you can’t expect today’s software to 
run on a computer that’s been gathering dust 
in the attic for the last 15 years. The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “Neither do men put 
new wine into old bottles: else the bottles 
break, and the wine runneth out, and the 
bottles perish” (Matthew 9:17).
Variant of this proverb: don’t put 
new wine in old bottles.
you can’t run with the hare and hunt 
with the hounds  You cannot support 
two opposing parties at the same time: 
“‘You ought to know best,’ he said, ‘but 
if you want a divorce it’s not very wise 
to go seeing her, is it? One can’t run with 
the hare and hunt with the hounds’” (John 
Galsworthy, The Forsyte Saga, 1922). The 
proverb dates from before 1449. Until the 
late 19th century it was most frequently 
used in the form of the fi gurative phrase to 
hold with the hare and run with the hound.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
no man can serve two masters.
you can’t serve God and mammon  A 
devout or virtuous way of life is incom-
patible with the pursuit of material 
wealth and possessions: “‘He hasn’t many 
friends—been too busy all his life to make 
any. He’s made heaps of money, though.’ 
‘Well, he thought that since he couldn’t 
serve God and Mammon he’d better stick 
to Mammon. . . . So he shouldn’t complain 
if he doesn’t fi nd Mammon very good 
company now’” (Lucy Maud Montgomery, 
Anne’s House of Dreams, 1917). The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “No man can serve 
two masters. . . . Ye cannot serve God 
and mammon” (Matthew 6:24). Mammon 
means “material wealth or possessions.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
no man can serve two masters.
you can’t shift an old tree without it 
dying  Relocation is not good for old 
people: We tried to persuade my mother to sell 
her house and move closer to us, but she refused. 
“You can’t shift an old tree without it dying,” 
she said. The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, c. 1518.
Variant of this proverb: old trees 
can’t be transplanted.
you can’t step twice into the same river 
Things are constantly changing: Some people 
fi nd change exciting and stimulating, while 
others fi nd it unsettling and alarming, but the 
fact remains that you can’t step twice into the 
same river. The proverb is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the writings of the Greek phi-
losopher Heraclitus (fi fth century b.c.).
you can’t take it with you  You might 
as well spend your money while you are 
alive, because it can’t be carried with you 
into the next world: He decided to blow the 
remaining money on a world cruise, on the 
principle that you can’t take it with you. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1841.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t 
take it with you when you go.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
shrouds have no pockets.
you can’t teach an old dog new 
tricks  Old people are often unwilling 
you can’t put new wine in old bottles
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   314 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
315
or unable to learn new skills or adopt 
new methods: “Since I’m 95 years old, it 
may be that ‘you can’t teach an old dog 
new tricks,’ but I’m just not comfort-
able with new appliances. They make me 
nervous and . . . never work for me” (New 
York Times, 1989). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1636, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: an old dog 
will learn no tricks.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: never too old to learn.
you can’t tell a book by its cover  See 
don’t judge a book by its cover.
you can’t unscramble eggs  Damage 
cannot be undone, and changes cannot be 
reversed: We must think very carefully before 
taking such a drastic step—the result could be 
disastrous, and you can’t unscramble eggs. The 
proverb is attributed to the U.S. fi nancier 
and art collector J. Pierpont Morgan 
(1837–1913).
Variant of this proverb: scrambled 
eggs can’t be unscrambled.
you can’t win ’em all  Nobody can hope 
to succeed every time: I thought she might 
be upset to learn that she hadn’t got the job, 
but she just shrugged her shoulders and said, 
“You can’t win ’em all.” The proverb dates 
from the mid-20th century.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you win some, you lose some.
you don’t get something for noth-
ing  Everything has to be paid for, directly 
or indirectly, in money or in kind: You don’t 
get something for nothing—I’ll expect you to 
return the favor one of these days. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in Phineas T. Barnum’s 
Struggles and Triumphs (1870): “When peo-
ple expect to get ‘something for nothing’ 
they are sure to be cheated.” The sentiment 
it expresses, however is of earlier origin; in 
his novel Sybil (1845), Benjamin Disraeli 
wrote, “To do nothing and get something 
formed a boy’s ideal of a manly career.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: nothing for nothing; there’s no 
such thing as a free lunch.
you get nothing for nothing  See noth-
ing for nothing.
you get what you pay for  The quality 
of goods and services is refl ected in their 
price—cheap things are usually inferior 
and expensive things are usually superior: 
He charges more than my last barber, but you 
get what you pay for, and he cuts my hair well.
you have to eat a bushel of dirt before 
you die  See we must eat a peck of dirt 
before we die.
you have to learn to crawl before you 
can walk  See we must learn to walk 
before we can run.
you have to take the bad with the 
good  See you have to take the bitter 
with the sweet.
you have to take the bitter with the 
sweet  You must endure the bad times 
if you want to enjoy the good times: In 
marriage, as in everything else, you have to 
take the bitter with the sweet. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1546, but the sen-
timent it expresses is of earlier origin, 
occurring in Alexander Barclay’s The Ship 
of Fools (1509): “Take ye in good worth the 
swetnes with the sour.”
 you have to take the bitter with the sweet
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   315 1/29/07   5:13:11 PM
316
Variants of this proverb: always take 
the bitter with the better; you have to take 
the bad with the good.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s no rose without a thorn.
you have to take the rough with the 
smooth  Everything has pleasant and 
unpleasant—or diffi cult and easy—
aspects: “‘Every profession,’ I said, ‘has 
got its dirty jobs. . . .’ ‘And will have,’ she 
said, ‘so long as professional men consent 
to do the dirty work of their employers.’ 
‘And where should I be, I should like to 
know,’ I said, ‘if I went on that lay? I’ve 
got to take the rough with the smooth.’ ” 
(John Galsworthy, The Freelands, 1915). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1400.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that would have eggs must endure 
the cackling of hens.
you’ll be damned if you do and damned 
if you don’t  In some situations it is 
impossible to do the right thing, because 
both of the options open to you will cause 
trouble or upset: “The toughest question I 
get is when people ask me what to do with 
policies of troubled companies. . . . Usually 
there’s a surrender charge involved to get 
out of the policy, so you’re damned if you 
do and damned if you don’t” (New York Times, 
1994). The proverb comes from Lorenzo 
Dow’s Refl ections on the Love of God (1836).
you must lose a fl y to catch a trout  See 
throw out a sprat to catch a 
 mackerel.
you must take two bears to live with 
you—bear and forbear  See bear and 
forbear.
you need more than dancing shoes to be 
a dancer  Doing something well is not 
just a matter of having the right equip-
ment: Buying her a new piano is a waste of 
money—she has no talent, and you need more 
than dancing shoes to be a dancer. The prov-
erb is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
you never accumulate if you don’t spec-
ulate  See if you don’t speculate, you 
can’t accumulate.
you never get anything for nothing  See 
nothing for nothing.
you never know a man until you live 
with him  When you live with some-
body you fi nd out what he or she is 
really like: She believes that all couples 
should cohabit before they marry, on the 
principle that you never know a man until 
you live with him.
Variant of this proverb: you never 
know a man until you bed with him a 
winter and summer.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
come live with me and you’ll know 
me.
you never know what you can do until 
you try  People are often surprised to 
discover what they are capable of when 
they make an effort: I didn’t think I could 
walk that far, but you never know what you 
can do till you try. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1818 in William Cobbett’s 
Year’s Residence in America.
you never miss a slice from a cut loaf 
See a slice off a cut loaf isn’t missed.
you never miss the water till the well 
runs dry  We tend to take some things 
for granted, and become aware of their 
you have to take the rough with the smooth
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   316 1/29/07   5:13:11 PM
317
value only when they are no longer 
available: “Do not let your chances, like 
sunbeams pass you by;/For you never 
miss the water till the well runs dry” 
(Rowland Howard, You Never Miss the 
Water, 1876). The proverb dates from 
before 1628.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: blessings brighten as they take 
their flight; the cow knows not the 
value of her tail till she has lost it.
a young barber and an old physi-
cian  Youth is fi ne in a barber but unde-
sirable in a doctor: My aunt declined seeing 
the youthful locum on the grounds that “a 
young barber and an old physician” was best. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in J. Sand-
ford, The Garden of Pleasure (1573).
Variant of this proverb: a young phy-
sician fattens the churchyard.
the young cock crows as he heard the 
old one  The young learn by the example 
of their elders. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in Alexander Barclay, Ship of 
Fools (1509): “The yonge cok lerneth to 
crowe hye of the olde.”
Variant of this proverb: the young 
pig grunts like the old sow.
young folks think old folks to be fools, 
but old folks know young folks to be 
fools  Young people think they are wiser 
than their elders, but the opposite is true: 
“‘Young folks always think old ones fools, 
they say.’ ‘Finish the adage, Sir, that old 
folks know young ones to be so, and then 
agree with me that it is a saying founded 
on prejudice” (Francis Edward Smedley, 
Frank Fairleigh, 1850). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1577 in J. Grange’s 
Golden Aphroditis.
a young man married is a young man 
marred  It is not good to marry too 
young: “You may carve it on his tomb-
stone, you may cut it on his card,/That 
a young man married is a young man 
marred!” (Rudyard Kipling, The Story of 
the Gadsbys, 1888). First recorded in 1589, 
with reference to young women rather 
than young men, the proverb occurs in 
Shakespeare’s play All’s Well That Ends Well 
(2:3; 1602): “A young man married is a 
man that’s marr’d.”
young men forgive, old men never  See 
youth and old age will never agree.
young men may die, but old men must 
die  Death is a possibility at any age, but 
a certainty in old age: I fought in two wars 
and survived, but nobody lives forever—young 
men may die, but old men must die. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1623, but the sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient origin, occurring in a story 
about a young Roman widow courted by 
an elderly man.
a young physician fattens the church-
yard  See a young barber and an old 
physician.
the young pig grunts like the old 
sow  See the young cock crows as he 
heard the old one.
young saint, old devil  Those who behave 
best when they are young are often those 
who behave worst when they are old: In 
later life he made up for the missed opportuni-
ties of his virtuous youth, indulging freely in 
all the excesses of the fl esh—a classic illustra-
tion of the saying “Young saint, old devil.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded (Middle English 
 young saint, old devil
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   317 1/29/07   5:13:11 PM
318
Sermons) c. 1400, but with the implication 
that it was already in common use.
Variant of this proverb: a young 
saint, an old sinner.
you pays your money and you takes 
your choice  It is up to you which item, 
course of action, or theory you choose; 
used when there is an element of chance 
involved, or when there is little differ-
ence between the options available: Which 
of their stories is closest to the truth? You pays 
your money and you takes your choice. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1846, as a 
cartoon caption in the British magazine 
Punch. It is sometimes occurs in the more 
grammatical form “You pay your money 
and you take your choice.”
Variant of this proverb: you pays 
your money and you takes your chance.
you’re only young once  Young people 
should take the opportunity to do all the 
things they will be unable to do when 
they’re older: He was in two minds about 
taking a year off to travel round the world, 
but I encouraged him, reminding him that 
you’re only young once. The proverbs fi rst 
recorded use is P. Wentworth’s In the Bal-
ance (1941).
you scratch my back, and I’ll scratch 
yours  Favors will be reciprocated; often 
used to imply corruption, or a covert 
arrangement between the parties con-
cerned: “In theory, racing’s addiction to 
the thin drip of a levy on betting turn-
over should mean that bookmakers and 
the sport’s administrators approach each 
other in a mutual spirit of: ‘You scratch 
my back, and I’ll scratch yours’” (Lon-
don Times, 1998). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1704, in the form “Scratch 
me and I’ll scratch you,” but the senti-
ment it expresses is of ancient origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: one hand washes the other; one 
good turn deserves another.
you should know a man seven years 
before you stir his fi re  You should not 
be too familiar with people, or interfere 
in their domestic affairs, until you have 
known them for some time: “Let me get 
you another drink. . . . I know one ought 
to know people seven years to poke their 
fi res, but I believe it’s less for cocktails” 
(Angela Thirkell, Marling Hall, 1942). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1803 in C. 
Dibdin’s Professional Life.
you snooze, you lose  Those who fail to 
keep alert will lose out: “I felt sorry for 
his disappointment, but in this business 
it’s a case of you snooze, you lose.” The 
proverb appears to be of U.S. origin, dat-
ing from the late 20th century.
youth and old age will never agree  The 
young and the old see the world dif-
ferently: “Youthe and elde is often at 
debaat” (Geoffrey Chaucer, The Canter-
bury Tales, c. 1387). It appears in William 
Shakespeare’s The Passionate Pilgrim in the 
form “Crabbed age and youth cannot live 
together.”
Variant of this proverb: young men 
forgive, old men never.
youth must be served Young people 
should be allowed to have their own 
way, helped, or treated with forbearance: 
Youth must be served, but we have to draw the 
line somewhere, and acts of wanton vandalism 
cannot be tolerated. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1829 in P. Egan’s Boxiana.
you pays your money and you takes your choice
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   318 1/29/07   5:13:11 PM
319
Variant of this proverb: youth will 
be served.
youth will have its fl ing  Young people 
should be forgiven for their excesses or 
improprieties: “I pray you, pardon me, ex-
Pirate King!/Peers will be peers, and youth 
will have its fl ing” (W. S. Gilbert and Arthur 
Sullivan, The Pirates of Penzance, 1879). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1562.
Variant of this proverb: youth will 
have its course.
you’ve made your bed, now lie in it  See 
as you make your bed, so you must 
lie in-it.
you win some, you lose some  Successes 
and failures tend to balance one another 
overall; used to indicate or advocate a 
nonchalant attitude to defeat: Hearing 
that he had not been successful in gaining the 
contract, he sighed with resignation, “You win 
some, you lose some. I guess there’ll always be a 
next time.” The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
in its variant form, in 1897, in Rudyard 
Kipling’s Captains Courageous.
Variant of this proverb: you win a 
few, you lose a few.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t win ’em all.
