
THE FACTS ON FILE DICTIONARY OF
Pr o v e r b s
MARTIN H. MANSER
Associate Editors:
Rosal ind Fergusson
David Pickering
Second Edition
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   i 1/29/07   3:23:27 PM
The Facts On File Dictionary of Proverbs
Copyright © 2002, 2007 by Martin H. Manser
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by 
any information storage or retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the 
publisher. For information contact:
Facts On File, Inc.
An imprint of Infobase Publishing
132 West 31st Street
New York NY 10001
ISBN-10: 0-8160-6673-6
ISBN-13: 978-0-8160-6673-5
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Manser, Martin H.
    The Facts On File dictionary of proverbs/Martin Manser; associate editor, 
  Rosalind Fergusson. David Pickering.
      p.  cm.
    Includes index.
    ISBN 0-8160-6673-6
    1. Proverbs, English.  I. Title: Dictionary of proverbs.  II. Fergusson, Rosalind.  
  III. Title.
  PN6421 .M36 2002
  082—dc21 2002067832
Facts On File books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk quantities 
for businesses, associations, institutions, or sales promotions. Please call our Special Sales 
Department in New York at (212) 967-8800 or (800) 322-8755.
You can fi nd Facts On File on the World Wide Web at http://www.factsonfi le.com
Visit the author’s Web site at http://www.martinmanser.com
Text design by Sandy Watanabe
Cover design by Cathy Rincon
Printed in the United States of America
MP Hermitage 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   ii 1/29/07   3:23:27 PM
To Hannah and Ben
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   iii 1/29/07   3:23:27 PM
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   iv 1/29/07   3:23:27 PM
Preface to the New Edition
vii
Introduction
ix
Entries A–Z
1
Boxes
African proverbs  3
Arabian proverbs  11
Biblical proverbs  27
Chinese proverbs  41
Dutch proverbs  69
French proverbs  95
German proverbs  100
Greek proverbs  111
Indian proverbs  142
Irish proverbs  144
Italian proverbs  145
Japanese proverbs  157
Literary proverbs  171
Co n t e n t s
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   v 1/29/07   3:23:27 PM
Russian proverbs  235
Scandinavian proverbs  238
Scottish proverbs  239
South American proverbs  249
Spanish proverbs  250
Turkish proverbs  281
Yiddish proverbs  308
Index by Key Word
320
Index by Theme
444
Bibliography
499
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   vi 1/29/07   3:23:27 PM
The text of this second edition of the dictionary has been expanded to include more 
familiar, long-established proverbs (e.g., it takes one to know one; worse 
things happen at sea) as well as a selection of more modern proverbial sayings 
(e.g., you snooze, you lose; men are from Mars, women are from Venus). 
As in the fi rst edition, care has been taken not to confuse idiomatic sayings with true 
proverbs and to include details of variant forms by which proverbs might be known 
to different readers. Existing entries have also been updated to include modern 
variants, e.g., the email of the species is more deadly than the mail, as a variant of the 
female of the species is deadlier than the male; and the geek shall inherit the 
earth, as a variant of the meek shall inherit the earth. The indexes have been 
similarly expanded.
Boxes
In addition, this text of this new edition has been embellished with boxes containing 
selections of interesting proverbs from a number of other languages and cultures. 
The aim of these is to provide a glimpse of other proverbial traditions. Many of 
these examples are foreign-language equivalents of familiar English sayings, while 
others are unique to their particular cultural background. Further boxes group 
proverbs that are related through their biblical or literary origins. Most of the prov-
erbs included in the boxes are not covered elsewhere in the main text.
Pr e f a c e  t o  t h e 
Ne w  E d i t i o n
vii
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   vii 1/29/07   3:23:27 PM
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   viii 1/29/07   3:23:27 PM
A proverb is a saying, usually short, that expresses a general truth about life. 
Proverbs give advice, make an observation, or present a teaching in a succinct and 
memorable way. This dictionary covers the main English-language proverbs that are 
widely recognized today.
We use proverbs or allude to them quite often in everyday speech: Better safe 
than sorry; The grass is always greener on the other side of the fence; If at fi rst you don’t suc-
ceed, try, try again; Let sleeping dogs lie; A trouble shared is a trouble halved.
Arrangement of proverbs
In this dictionary the proverbs are listed by strict letter-by-letter alphabetical order 
of the proverb, excluding only at the beginning of a proverb, A, An, and The:
big fi sh eat little fi sh
the bigger they are, the harder they fall
a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush
a bird never fl ew on one wing
too much of a good thing is worse than none at all
toot your own horn lest the same be never tooted
to the pure all things are pure
Proverbs can also be found using the keyword index, which lists all the main nouns, 
adjectives, and verbs.
Defi nitions
After the proverb itself comes an explanation of the meaning of the proverb:
pride goes before a fall
ix
In t r o d u c t i o n
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   ix 1/29/07   3:23:27 PM
Arrogance and overconfi dence often lead to humiliation or disaster; often used 
as a warning . . .
uneasy lies the head that wears a crown
Those in power are weighed down by responsibilities, feelings of insecurity, or fears 
of losing their position and can never rest easy . . .
Examples
Examples have been chosen to demonstrate the use of a proverb. They come from 
English literature or have been specially compiled for this text:
boys will be boys
Boys must be forgiven for their bad or boisterous behavior; also used ironically 
when grown men behave in an irresponsible or childish manner: “Aunt Sally was 
a good deal uneasy; but Uncle Silas he said there warn’t no occasion to be—boys 
will be boys, he said, and you’ll see this one turn up in the morning all sound and 
right” (Mark Twain, Huckleberry Finn, 1884).
a good name is sooner lost than won
It takes a lot of time and effort to earn a good name for yourself, but you can lose it 
in an instant with a single foolish act: Think carefully before you get involved in anything 
that is not strictly legal—remember that a good name is sooner lost than won.
Origins
Many proverbs have been in use for many years:
every man is his own worst enemy
. . . The proverb was fi rst recorded in Thomas Browne’s Religio Medici (1643).
every man is the architect of his own fortune
. . .  The proverb is attributed to the Roman politician Appius Claudius Caecus, who 
held the post of censor from 312 b.c. to 308 b.c.
Sometimes, proverbs are quotations:
the leopard can’t change its spots
. . . The proverb is of biblical origin: “Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the 
leopard his spots?” (Jeremiah 13:23).
Introduction
x
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   x 1/29/07   3:23:27 PM
a rose by any other name would smell as sweet
. . .  The proverb comes from Shakespeare’s play Romeo and Juliet (2:2): “What’s in a 
name? that which we call a rose/By any other name would smell as sweet.”
Some proverbs have come into use in contemporary times. These include:
garbage in, garbage out
. . . First recorded in 1964, the proverb originally referred to computer input and 
output, and is still used in that context, often in the form of the acronym GIGO.
if it ain’t broke, don’t fi x it
. . .  The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1977, popularized by Bert Lance, director of the 
Offi ce of Management and Budget in President Jimmy Carter’s administration.
it takes a village to raise a child
. . . Of African origin, the proverb was popularized by Hillary Clinton, wife of 
President Bill Clinton, in the mid-1990s.
The “fi rst recorded” date given is not the date of origin—most proverbs origi-
nated in spoken language, and this is simply the fi rst known written record of the 
proverb:
fi rst impressions are the most lasting
. . .  The proverb was fi rst recorded in William Congreve’s play The Way of the World 
(1700) in the form “There is a great deal in the fi rst impression.”
Where an early form of a proverb or other quotation is taken from a named 
source, the spellings of the original have been retained; in other cases spellings have 
been modernized for the convenience of the user:
nature abhors a vacuum
. . . Of ancient origin, the proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 1551, in Thomas 
Cranmer’s Answer to Gardiner: “Naturall reason abhorreth vacuum.”
a cat has nine lives
. . .  The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in the form “A woman has nine lives 
like a cat.”
Variants and use of proverbs
Variants on the proverb are given after the main entry:
a word to the wise is suffi cient
Introduction
xi
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   xi 1/29/07   3:23:28 PM
Variant of this proverb: a word is enough to the wise.
Alterations to the words of the proverb, shorter expressions of the proverb, or 
humorous applications are also shown:
once a thief always a thief
. . . Other words may be substituted for thief, such as crook, drunkard, fool, or whore, 
and the proverb is occasionally applied to those with enduring virtues rather than 
persistent vices, as in “Once a lady, always a lady.”
to err is human, to forgive divine
. . . A modern facetious variant is “To err is human, but to really foul things up 
requires a computer.”
Cross-references
Cross-references are given from all variant entries that are not alphabetically adja-
cent to the main form:
A word is enough to the wise  See A WORD TO THE WISE IS SUFFICIENT.
Proverbs with similar or opposite meanings
Proverbs that express similar or opposite meanings are listed at the end of entries:
actions speak louder than words
Proverb expressing similar meaning: deeds are fruits, words are but leaves.
absence makes the heart grow fonder
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: out of sight, out of mind.
Indexes
Two indexes are included at the back of this dictionary:
Index of themes—a listing of proverbs under thematic headings.
Index of keywords—a listing of the nouns, adjectives, and verbs of the proverbs.
Martin H. Manser
Rosalind Fergusson
David Pickering
Introduction
xii
i-xii_DictProverbsFM_(FOF).indd   xii 1/29/07   3:23:28 PM
ååå   å
1
absence is the mother of disillusion A 
period of separation may enable you to 
consider people or things more objec-
tively and see them in a truer but less 
favorable light: While her boyfriend was away 
she became increasingly aware of all his little 
faults, which she had ignored when they were 
together—absence is the mother of disillusion. 
The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
absence makes the heart grow fonder 
Your affection for those close to you—
family and friends—increases when you 
are parted from them: “. . . meantime he 
exhorts me to the exercise of patience, 
‘that fi rst of woman’s virtues,’ and desires 
me to remember the saying, ‘Absence 
makes the heart grow fonder,’ and com-
fort myself with the assurance that the 
longer he stays away the better he shall 
love me when he returns” (Anne Brontë, 
Tenant of Wildfell Hall, 1848). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1850, but the senti-
ment is expressed in earlier literature—
for example, by James Howell 
(1593?–1666), who wrote “Distance 
some times endears friendship, and 
absence sweeteneth it.” Compare Sextus 
Propertius (c. 54 b.c.–a.d. 2), “semper in 
absentes felicior aestus amantes [passion is 
always warmer toward absent lovers].”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: out of sight, out of mind.
the absent are always in the wrong  See 
he who is absent is always in the 
wrong.
the absent are never without fault nor 
the present without excuse  See he 
who is absent is always in the wrong.
accidents will happen in the best-regu-
lated families  No matter how careful 
you are, you may still do something 
by accident or mistake; often used to 
console somebody who has done such a 
thing: “‘Copperfi eld,’ said Mr. Micawber, 
‘accidents will occur in the best-regulated 
families; and in families not regulated by 
. . . the infl uence of Woman, in the lofty 
character of Wife, they must be expected 
with confi dence, and must be borne with 
philosophy’” (Charles Dickens, David 
Copperfi eld, 1850). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in George Colman’s play Deuce 
Is in Him (1763) in the shorter form “acci-
dents will happen.”
Variant of this proverb: accidents 
will happen in the best of families.
accusing the times is but excusing our-
selves  People who seek to blame the 
a
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   1 1/29/07   5:12:15 PM
times or conditions they live in are really 
trying to avoid taking the blame them-
selves: It strikes me that the prime minister 
needs to be reminded that those who accuse the 
times are but excusing themselves. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1732 by Thomas 
Fuller in Gnomologia.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ings: he who excuses himself accuses 
himself.
action is worry’s worst enemy  You can 
banish anxiety by keeping busy and active, 
or by taking action to solve the problem 
that is worrying you: Action is worry’s worst 
enemy, so don’t just sit there brooding—do 
something!
actions speak louder than words  What 
you do is more important than what 
you say, or what you promise to do: 
“The gallant foreigner, who could not tell 
them how he sympathized with them, but 
whose actions spoke louder than words” 
(F. McCullagh, With the Cossacks, 1906). 
The fi rst recorded use of the proverb, in 
the form “actions are more precious than 
words,” was in a speech by the English 
politician John Pym in 1628. Its current 
form is of U.S. origin.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: deeds are fruits, words are but 
leaves.
action without thought is like shooting 
without aim  Think before you act in order 
to achieve the best results: Disregarding the 
proverb that action without thought is like shoot-
ing without aim, he went straight out and bought 
a computer that proved to be totally unsuitable 
for his needs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
look before you leap.
admiration is the daughter of ignorance 
People often admire others about whom 
they only have incomplete knowledge: 
The president’s current popularity only proves 
the rule that admiration is the daughter 
of ignorance. This U.S. proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1733–58 by Benjamin Frank-
lin in Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what the eye doesn’t see, the heart 
doesn’t grieve over.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: prejudice is the daughter of igno-
rance.
adventures are to the adventurous 
Those who are not bold, and who take 
no risks, will not have exciting lives 
or achieve spectacular things: “He told 
himself that adventure was to the adven-
turous. . . . If he could not make the 
effort for the small he would miss the big 
adventure” (Thomas Hinde, Mr. Nicholas, 
1952). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Benjamin Disraeli’s Coningsby (1844).
adversity makes strange bedfellows  In 
times of hardship or misfortune people 
often befriend or form alliances with those 
whose company they would normally avoid: 
The merger of the two companies surprised every-
body, but these are hard times for the industry and 
adversity makes strange bedfellows. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in Shakespeare’s play The 
Tempest (2:2) in the form “Misery acquaints a 
man with strange bedfellows.”
Variants of this proverb: misery 
makes strange bedfellows; poverty makes 
strange bedfellows.
after a storm comes a calm  A period 
of anger or trouble is usually followed 
by a period of relative peace: “After a 
action is worry’s worst enemy
2
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   2 1/29/07   5:12:15 PM
3
storm comes a calm. Wearied with a for-
mer blustering they began now to repose 
themselves in a sad silence” (Thomas 
Fuller, Church History of Britain, 1655). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1582, but the sentiment it expresses is 
found in writing more than 200 years ear-
lier. It has given rise to the cliché the calm 
before the storm, which reverses the order 
of things and describes a period of peace 
before an upheaval.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the darkest hour is just before 
dawn; when things are at the worst 
they begin to mend.
after death the doctor Help sometimes 
comes too late: “All his tricks founder, and 
he brings his physic/After his patient’s death: 
the King already/Hath married the fair lady” 
(William Shakespeare, Henry VIII, 3:2). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1385–90 by 
Geoffrey Chaucer in Troilus and Criseyde.
after dinner rest awhile, after supper 
walk a mile  It is best for the digestion 
AFRICAN PROVERBS
Every African country has its heritage of sayings and proverbs. Some are known throughout 
the continent, while others are unique to particular countries. The following list includes 
some of the most colorful examples, many of them inspired by the wildlife and landscape of 
Africa.
The best trees grow on the steepest hills
By trying often, the monkey learns to jump from the tree
Do not blame God for having created the tiger, but thank him for not giving it wings
Even if the elephant is thin he is still the lord of the jungle
Even the best cooking pot will not produce food
Every beast roars in its own den
Fear is no obstacle to death
Goats cannot live in a herd of leopards
He on whose head we would break a coconut never stands still
The horizon will not disappear as you run towards it
Hunt in every jungle, for there is wisdom and good hunting in all of them
If there were no elephants in the jungle, the buffalo would be big
If they are offered winged ants, people will eat them
If you have escaped the jaws of the crocodile while bathing in the river, you will 
surely meet a leopard on the way
If you have fi ve wives, then you have fi ve tongues
Rain does not fall on one roof alone
The smaller the lizard the greater the hope of becoming a crocodile
The viper assumes the colors of his surroundings
When you chop off a snake’s head all you are left with is a piece of rope
Where the cattle stand together, the lion lies down hungry
Where there is no wealth there is no poverty
ååååå after dinner rest awhile, after supper walk a mile
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   3 1/29/07   5:12:15 PM
4
to rest after a heavy meal and take some 
exercise after a light meal: “As the prov-
erb says, for health sake, after dinner, or 
rather after supper, willingly then I’ll walk 
a mile to hear thee” (Philip Massinger, The 
Unnatural Combat, 1639). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1582 in a slightly differ-
ent form, with talk in place of rest.
Variant of this proverb: after dinner 
sit awhile, after supper walk a mile.
age before beauty  Older people have 
precedence over those who are younger 
and more attractive; said when standing 
back to let another person go fi rst or 
when pushing in ahead of somebody: “Age 
before beauty,” she said as she stepped in front of 
the young woman at the head of the line. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1843. Face-
tious retorts or extensions to the proverb 
include “Beauty before the beast,” “Grace 
before meat,” and “Pearls before swine.”
the age of miracles is past  Miracles no 
longer happen; used when some desirable 
occurrence seems highly unlikely: I didn’t 
expect the authorities to take any action in 
response to my complaint—the age of miracles 
is past. The proverb occurs in Shakespeare’s 
play All’s Well that Ends Well (2:3) in the form 
“They say miracles are past,” which implies 
that it is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: wonders will never cease!
agree, for the law is costly  It is expen-
sive to settle disputes in court because of 
the legal costs involved: “Come, agree, 
agree; the law’s costly” (Jonathan Swift, 
A Complete Collection of Polite and Ingenious 
Conversation, 1738). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1605 by William Camden in 
Remains Concerning Britain.
alcohol will preserve anything but a 
secret  People have a tendency to talk too 
freely and become indiscreet when they 
are drunk: I hoped that he would not have too 
much to drink at the reception—I had told him 
about Kate’s pregnancy in confi dence, and it’s 
well known that alcohol will preserve anything 
but a secret. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: drunkenness reveals what soberness 
conceals; there’s truth in wine.
all animals are equal, but some are more 
equal than others  In a society or orga-
nization where all are supposedly equal, it 
is often the case that some have special privi-
leges, or greater power than others: “Thus, 
even on the night of such personal triumph, 
Jason Gilbert was once again reminded 
that although all Harvard undergraduates 
are equal, some are more equal than oth-
ers” (Erich Segal, The Class, 1985). Other 
words may be substituted for animals, as 
in the above quotation. The proverb comes 
from George Orwell’s novel Animal Farm 
(1945), where it is the ultimate slogan of a 
supposedly egalitarian regime set up by the 
animals of a farm, which gradually becomes 
as tyrannical as the human one it replaced.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
all men are created equal.
all arts are brothers, each is a light to 
the other  The arts should not be con-
sidered as separate entities but as parts 
of one whole, each complementing and 
leading to a better understanding and 
appreciation of the others: Looking at a 
great painting can move me in the same way 
as listening to a fi ne piece of music—they say 
all arts are brothers. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1847.
age before beauty
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   4 1/29/07   5:12:15 PM
5
Variant of this proverb: all arts are 
one, all branches on one tree.
all bad things come in threes  See 
things come in threes.
all cats are gray in the dark  People 
have no distinguishing features, and their 
appearance becomes unimportant, in the 
dark; sometimes used with reference to 
a person’s choice of sexual partner: “You 
forgot that all cats are grey in the dark and 
so are uniformed policemen” (Jonathan 
Ross, Dark Blue and Dangerous, 1981). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1596. It was used with sexual con-
notations in a letter written by Benjamin 
Franklin in 1745: “And as in the dark all 
Cats are grey, the Pleasure of corporal 
Enjoyment with an old Woman is at least 
equal, and frequently superior.”
Variants of this proverb: all cats are 
black at night; at night all cats are gray.
all chiefs and no Indians  See too many 
chiefs and not enough indians.
all commend patience, but none can 
endure to suffer  It is far easier to tell 
somebody else to be patient than to be 
patient yourself: She said I should wait and 
see, but it was diffi cult to take her advice—all 
commend patience, but none can endure to 
suffer. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1948 in a U.S. proverb collection.
all fi sh are not caught with fl ies  In 
some circumstances different methods 
must be employed to achieve a desired 
end: The old man grinned and said something 
about all fi sh not being caught with fl ies. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1580 by 
John Lyly in Euphues and his England.
all good things come in threes  See 
things come in threes.
all good things come to those who 
wait  See all things come to those 
who wait.
all good things must come to an 
end  Nothing lasts forever; often said 
resignedly when a pleasant experience 
or sequence of events fi nally ends: We 
had had a wonderful vacation, but all good 
things must come to an end. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1440: “Ye wote wele 
of all thing moste be an ende” (Partonope 
of Blois). The word good was probably 
not added until the 19th or early 20th 
century.
all is fi sh that comes to the net  Anything 
that comes along is accepted and turned to 
advantage: “I don’t know that she cares for 
one more than the other. There are a cou-
ple of young Air Force chaps too. I fancy 
all’s fi sh that comes to her net at present” 
(Agatha Christie, Murder in Mesopotamia, 
1936). First recorded c. 1520, the proverb 
is sometimes applied to a particular person 
by substituting my, his, her, and so on for the, 
as in this example.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
all is grist that comes to the mill.
all is grist that comes to the mill  Every-
thing, no matter how small or unpromis-
ing, can be put to use: She carried a notebook 
and pencil with her wherever she went—for a 
writer, all is grist that comes to the mill. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with slightly 
different wording, in 1655. It also occurs 
with my, his, her, and so on in place of the 
and in the fi gurative phrase grist to the mill, 
as in Charles Dickens’s novel A Tale of Two 
 all is grist that comes to the mill
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   5 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
6
Cities (1859): “The clearance was effected 
at last; the Stryver arrears were hand-
somely fetched up; everything was got 
rid of until November should come with 
its fogs atmospheric, and fogs legal, and 
bring grist to the mill again.” Grist is grain 
brought to a mill to be ground.
Variant of this proverb: it’s all grist 
for the mill.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
all is fish that comes to the net.
all is not gold that glitters  See all that 
glitters is not gold.
all lay loads on the willing horse  See 
the willing horse carries the load.
all men are created equal  No person 
is born superior or inferior to another, 
so all should have equal rights: “Colonel 
Cathcart was infused with the democratic 
spirit: he believed that all men were cre-
ated equal, and therefore spurned all men 
outside Group Headquarters with equal 
fervor” (Joseph Heller, Catch-22, 1955). 
The proverb comes from the Declara-
tion of Independence (1776), in which 
Thomas Jefferson wrote: “We hold these 
truths to be self-evident, that all men are 
created equal, that they are endowed by 
their Creator with certain unalienable 
Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, 
and the pursuit of Happiness.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: jack’s as good as his master; all 
animals are equal, but some are more 
equal than others.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: equality begins in the grave.
all roads lead to Rome  There are many 
different ways to achieve the same result, 
or to come to the same conclusion: “All 
roads lead to Rome: and even animal 
individuality throws a ray on human prob-
lems” (J. S. Huxley, The Individual in 
the Animal Kingdom, 1912). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in Chaucer’s Prologue to Astrolabe (c. 
1391). Compare the medieval Latin prov-
erb “Mille vie ducunt hominem per secula 
Romam [A thousand roads lead man for-
ever toward Rome].” In modern use other 
place-names are sometimes substituted 
for Rome.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: there are more ways of killing 
a cat than choking it with cream; 
there’s more than one way to skin 
a cat.
all’s fair in love and war  Any action, 
however mean or unscrupulous, is per-
missible in certain situations; often used 
to justify cheating or deception: “‘You 
opened the letter!’ . . . ‘How was I to read 
it if I hadn’t? All’s . . . fair in love and war, 
you know’” (Francis Edward Smedley, 
Frank Fairleigh, 1850). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
in 1620. In modern use an extra word is 
often added to or substituted for part of 
the proverb, as in “All’s fair in love—an’ 
war—an’ politics” (George Ade, County 
Chairman, 1903).
all’s for the best in the best of all pos-
sible worlds  Everything that happens 
does so for a good reason, and things in 
general cannot be any better; generally 
used to present an optimistic worldview: 
“The administrative departments were 
consuming miles of red tape in the cor-
rectest forms of activity, and everything 
was for the best in the best of all possible 
all is not gold that glitters
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   6 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
7
worlds” (George Bernard Shaw, The Shew-
ing-up of Blanco Posnet, 1911). The proverb 
is a translation of a line from the French 
writer Voltaire’s philosophical tale Candide 
(1759). In The Silver Stallion (1926), James 
Branch Cabell made the more cynical 
observation: “The optimist proclaims that 
we live in the best of all possible worlds; 
and the pessimist fears this is true.”
all’s well that ends well  Problems and 
misfortunes along the way can be for-
gotten when everything ends satisfac-
torily: “When the books were signed 
the vicar congratulated the husband and 
wife on having performed a noble, and 
righteous, and mutually forgiving act. 
‘All’s well that ends well,’ he said smiling” 
(Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure, 1895). 
First recorded in this form c. 1530, the 
proverb is perhaps best known as the title 
of one of Shakespeare’s plays.
all that glitters is not gold  People and 
things are not always as attractive or valu-
able as they seem: “‘I do wish I hadn’t a 
penny in the world, then I should know 
who my true friends were.’ ‘Poor little 
lass! She has found out that all that glitters 
is not gold, and the disillusion has begun,’ 
said the doctor to himself ” (Louisa May 
Alcott, Rose in Bloom, 1876). The proverb 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play The Merchant 
of Venice (2:7) in the form “All that glisters 
is not gold,” but the sentiment it expresses 
was fi rst recorded c. 1220.
Variant of this proverb: all is not gold 
that glitters.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
appearances are deceiving.
all the world’s a stage  Everybody goes 
through life acting out the roles that they 
have to play: “Jackie [Onassis] never lets 
down in public. The whole world is a stage 
and she’s its leading lady” (New York Post, 
1994). The proverb was popularized in 
this form in Shakespeare’s play As You Like It 
(2:7): “All the world’s a stage,/And all the 
men and women merely players:/They 
have their exits and their entrances;/And 
one man in his time plays many parts.”
Variant of this proverb: the world is a 
stage and all the people in it actors.
all things are easy to industry, all things 
diffi cult to sloth  Anything can be 
achieved by those who are prepared to 
work hard: You’ll never fi nd a job if you sit in 
front of the television all day—all things are 
easy to industry, all things diffi cult to sloth. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1734, in Ben-
jamin Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Variant of this proverb: sloth makes 
all things diffi cult, but industry makes all 
things easy.
all things are possible with God  Noth-
ing is impossible to the divine will; often 
used more generally to imply that any-
thing might happen: He seemed an unlikely 
candidate for the priesthood, but all things 
are possible with God. The proverb is of 
biblical origin in its current form: “With 
men this is impossible; but with God all 
things are possible” (Matthew 19:26), but 
the sentiment it expressed is found much 
earlier, in Homer’s Odyssey (c. eighth cen-
tury b.c.): “with the gods all things can 
be done.”
all things come to an end  See every-
thing has an end.
all things come to those who wait  If 
you are patient, you will have what you 
 all things come to those who wait
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   7 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
8
desire: Remember that all things come to those 
who wait, and don’t be too disappointed if you 
miss promotion this time. First recorded in 
1530 with different wording, the proverb 
occurs in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s 
Tales of a Wayside Inn (1863): “All things 
come to him who will but wait.”
Variants of this proverb: all good 
things come to those who wait; every-
thing comes to those who wait.
all things will pass  See this, too, shall 
pass.
all words are pegs to hang ideas on 
Words are simply tools for the formula-
tion and communication of ideas: It doesn’t 
matter which terminology you use—all words 
are pegs to hang ideas on. The proverb origi-
nated in 1887, in Henry Ward Beecher’s 
Proverbs from Plymouth Pulpit.
all work and no play makes Jack a dull 
boy  People who do not make time 
for leisure activities risk damaging their 
health, the quality of their work, or their 
personal relationships; often used to jus-
tify a break from work or to persuade 
somebody to take one: You’re doing far 
too much overtime—all work and no play 
makes Jack a dull boy. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1659. It may be applied 
to people of either sex, often with the 
person’s name in place of Jack (and girl in 
place of boy, if appropriate).
always a bridesmaid, never a bride  If 
you are often asked to be a bridesmaid—
traditionally, three or more times—you 
will never marry yourself; also used more 
generally as a lament by a young woman 
who receives many invitations to be brides-
maid but no proposals of marriage: I’ve been 
bridesmaid to three of my old schoolfriends—
when will it be my turn to get married? Always 
a bridesmaid, never a bride. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1882 in E. M. Ingraham’s 
Bond & Free in the form “Always a maiden, 
never a wife,” the word maiden meaning 
“bridal attendant” in this context.
Variant of this proverb: three times a 
bridesmaid, never a bride.
always in a hurry, always behind  When 
you try to do things too quickly you work 
less effi ciently and ultimately take longer: 
Bearing in mind the saying “Always in a hurry, 
always behind,” I made an effort to slow down 
and work more methodically. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1948 in a U.S. prov-
erb collection.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: more haste, less speed; haste 
makes waste.
always look on the bright side  You 
should always take the optimistic or posi-
tive view, especially when things are going 
badly: “I was walking the ridgepole and I 
fell off. I expect I have sprained my ankle. 
But . . . I might have broken my neck. Let 
us look on the bright side of things” (Lucy 
Maud Montgomery, Anne of Green Gables, 
1908). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1726, in a sermon by John Wesley. 
According to a less well-known saying, 
“If you try to make some people see the 
bright side, they will complain that it 
hurts their eyes.”
Variant of this proverb: look on the 
bright side, or polish up the dark one.
always something new out of Africa 
Africa is an endless source of novelty and 
interest: The story just goes to prove that 
there is always something new out of Africa. 
all things will pass
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   8 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
9
The proverb was recorded as early as the 
fourth century b.c. by Aristotle in De 
Anima. It became more familiar in more 
modern times through the release of the 
fi lm entitled Out of Africa in 1985.
always take the bitter with the better 
See you have to take the bitter with 
the sweet.
America is a tune: it must be sung 
together  There is a need for unity and 
harmony among and within the states of 
America: America is a tune, it must be sung 
together, and we must strive to achieve consen-
sus on this issue. The proverb is recorded 
as a regional expression in the United 
States.
anger improves nothing but the arch of a 
cat’s back  There is nothing to be gained 
by losing your temper: It’s no use shouting 
at them when they make a mistake—anger 
improves nothing but the arch of a cat’s back. 
The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
anger without power is folly  It is futile 
to get angry about things you can do noth-
ing about: He is in no position to do anything 
and might as well as calm down: as they say, 
anger without power is folly. The proverb is 
thought to have been ultimately of Ger-
man origin.
another day, another dollar  However 
hard or tedious paid work may be, at least 
there is some fi nancial reward; often said 
with relief at the end of the working day 
or, more generally, in the hope of a better 
day tomorrow: I get little job satisfaction 
from the work, but my philosophy is “Another 
day, another dollar.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1957, in D. Erskine’s Pink 
Hotel, but may have originated earlier in 
the 20th century.
Variant of this proverb: a new day, a 
new dollar.
any port in a storm  In desperate cir-
cumstances people will accept help from 
any source, including those they would 
normally shun: “‘I have understood that 
there is a little feeling between you and 
Mr. Hand and the other gentlemen I have 
mentioned. But . . . I’m in a corner, and 
it’s any port in a storm. If you want to 
help me I’ll make the best terms I can, 
and won’t forget the favor’” (Theodore 
Dreiser, The Titan, 1914). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1749, in John Cle-
land’s Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure, better 
known as Fanny Hill.
any publicity is good publicity  Even 
bad publicity draws attention to a person 
or product and may therefore serve a 
useful purpose: The show was panned in the 
popular press, but ticket sales have soared—it 
seems that any publicity is good publicity! The 
proverb probably originated in the 20th 
century.
any stick will serve to beat a dog 
with  See it’s easy to find a stick to 
beat a dog.
anything worth doing is worth doing 
well  See if a thing’s worth doing, 
it’s worth doing well.
an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, though 
they be clad in silk or scarlet  The true 
nature of a person or thing may be hid-
den by outside appearance but cannot be 
changed: “The naked ape is in danger of 
 an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, though they be clad in silk or scarlet
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   9 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
10
. . . forgetting that beneath the surface 
gloss he is still very much a primate. (‘An 
ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, though 
they be clad in silk or scarlet’)” (Desmond 
Morris, The Naked Ape, 1967). The prov-
erb is of ancient origin in the form “An 
ape is an ape, even if it has gold insignia,” 
which occurs in the works of the Greek 
writer Lucian (c. 125–c. 200). The word 
varlet may mean “servant” or “rogue,” and 
silk and scarlet are traditionally worn by 
holders of high offi ce, such as in the legal 
profession, at whom the proverb is often 
directed.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
clothes don’t make the man.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: clothes make the man.
appearances are deceiving  Things are 
not always as they seem, and you can-
not necessarily trust the evidence of 
your eyes: “Ahem—nothing of this, eh, 
Selden? As one of the family, I know I 
may count on you—appearances are 
deceptive—and Fifth Avenue is so imper-
fectly lighted” (Edith Wharton, The House 
of Mirth, 1905). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection, but the sentiment it expresses 
can be found in one of the fables of 
Aesop (sixth century b.c.), which also 
gave rise to the fi gurative phrase a wolf in 
sheep’s clothing.
Variant of this proverb: appearances 
are deceptive.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
all that glitters is not gold; a good 
horse cannot be of a bad color.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: if it looks like a duck, walks like 
a duck, and quacks like a duck, it’s a 
duck; what you see is what you get.
appetite comes with eating  Desire or 
enthusiasm for something often increases 
as you do it: They say that appetite comes 
with eating, and it seemed that the killer grew 
more hungry for blood after each successive 
murder. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in Rabelais’s Gargantua (1534), in the 
French form “l’appétit vient en mange-
ant.” In Hamlet (1:2), Shakespeare wrote 
(of Gertrude’s love for Hamlet’s father): 
“Why, she would hang on him,/As if 
increase of appetite had grown/By what 
it fed on.”
Variant of this proverb: the appetite 
grows on what it feeds on.
an apple a day keeps the doctor 
away  Fruit is an important part of a 
healthy diet: “An apple a day keeps the 
doctor away. But wait! Has the apple 
been treated with Alar?” (Washington Post, 
1991). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1866 in the form “Eat an apple on going 
to bed,/And you’ll keep the doctor from 
earning his bread.”
the apple never falls far from the 
tree  Children resemble their parents in 
character and nature: “Forbes has a lively 
sense of fun (his motorcycling, balloon-
riding father, Malcolm, certainly had one, 
and the apple does not fall far from the 
tree)” (Washington Post, 1996). The prov-
erb is also sometimes used with reference 
to children who choose to live close to 
their parents or their place of birth, as in 
a letter by Ralph Waldo Emerson (1839): 
“As men say the apple never falls far from 
the stem, I shall hope that another year 
will draw your eyes and steps to this old 
dear odious haunt of the race.” Compare 
the 16th-century German proverb “Der 
Apfel fellt nicht gerne weit vom Baume [The 
appearances are deceiving
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   10 1/29/07   5:12:16 PM
11
apple does not usually fall far from the 
tree].”
Variant of this proverb: an apple 
doesn’t roll far from the tree.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: like father, like son; like mother, 
like daughter.
April showers bring May fl owers  Some-
thing unpleasant often leads to something 
more desirable: We have had a diffi cult few 
months setting up the project, but April showers 
bring May fl owers, and we’re optimistic about the 
future. First recorded c. 1560, with different 
wording, the proverb is often used with its 
literal meaning as one of the many sayings 
quoted by amateur weather forecasters.
Variant of this proverb: March 
winds and April showers always bring 
May fl owers.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every cloud has a silver lining.
ARABIAN PROVERBS
Arabic culture places great importance upon the qualities of courage and honor, and this is 
refl ected in numerous proverbs of Arabian origin. Others are clearly rooted in the desolate 
desert wastes in which that culture evolved.
Better a thousand enemies outside the tent than one within
Better to be a free dog than a caged lion
Death rides a fast camel
Don’t pour away your water on the strength of a mirage
Fate loves a rebel
A good deed dies when it is spoken about
He who has been bitten by a snake is scared of a rope on the ground
If we are both masters, then who shall lead the mules?
It is better to cut off the head that has no pride
It is not the bullet that kills you, it is fate
Kiss the hand of your enemy if you cannot chop it off
Men fear, but time fears the pyramids
The monkey looks into the mirror and sees a gazelle
A mule can go to Mecca, but it will not come back as a pilgrim
Never trust a fool with a sword
Peace is only possible after war
Talent without skill is like a desert without an oasis
A thousand curses never tore a shirt
Trust in Allah, but tie up your camel
Two scorpions living in the same hole will get along better than two sisters in the 
same house
Whoever knew you when you were small will not respect you when you are big
You know a man by the sweat of his brow and the strength of his word
ååååå
 April showers bring May fl owers
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   11 1/29/07   5:12:17 PM
12
an army marches on its stomach  You 
must eat well if you want to work effec-
tively or achieve great things: “‘We should 
go,’ one of the sergeants said, eating his 
cheese and drinking a cup of wine. . . . 
‘An army travels on its stomach,’ I said” 
(Ernest Hemingway, A Farewell to Arms, 
1929). The proverb has been attributed 
to Frederick the Great (1712–86) and 
Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821).
Variant of this proverb: an army trav-
els on its stomach.
art consists in concealing art  See the 
best art conceals art.
art is long and life is short  Works of 
art are far more enduring than human 
lives: He used the works of the great artists of 
the Italian Renaissance to illustrate the saying 
“Art is long and life is short.” The proverb 
originated in the writings of the Greek 
physician Hippocrates (fourth century 
b.c.), where it was used with the mean-
ing that life is too short to become fully 
versed in an art, specifi cally the profession 
of medicine. Chaucer translated this c. 
1380 as “The lyf so short, the craft so long 
to lerne.” The proverb is still sometimes 
used with its ancient interpretation, as in 
Charles Dickens’s novel Martin Chuzzlewit 
(1843–44): “This . . . is my chamber. I 
read here when the family suppose I have 
retired to rest. Sometimes I injure my 
health rather more than I can quite justify 
to myself, by doing so; but art is long and 
time is short.” The proverb is also quoted 
in the Latin form “Ars longa, vita brevis.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the day is short and the work is long.
art is power  The arts, and those who 
work with them, are powerful agents of 
infl uence: We should remember that art is 
power, and treat our young artists accordingly. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1839, 
in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s prose 
romance Hyperion.
the art of being a parent consists of 
sleeping when the baby isn’t looking  The 
parents of a young baby must take what-
ever opportunity they can to catch up 
on lost sleep; a facetious comment on 
parenthood, implying that babies delight 
in keeping their parents awake: Jack’s 
fi rst child was born three weeks ago, and he’s 
been coming to work with dark rings under 
his eyes—I had to remind him that the art 
of being a parent consists of sleeping while 
the baby isn’t looking! This proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
as a tree falls, so shall it lie  People 
should not attempt to change their beliefs 
or opinions just because they are about 
to die: “She sent a message . . . to the old 
father to come and see her before she 
died. . . . His answer was, ‘As a tree falls 
so shall it lie’” (W. H. Hudson, Traveller 
in Little Things, 1921). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “in the place where the 
tree falleth, there it shall be” (Ecclesiastes 
11:3). It was fi rst recorded in its current 
form in a proverb collection of 1678.
Variant of this proverb: where the 
tree falls, there it shall lie.
as good be an addled egg as an idle 
bird  Somebody who tries and fails has 
achieved no less than somebody who 
does nothing at all; used as a reprimand 
for idleness or inaction: You could at least 
go out and try to fi x the gate—as good be 
an addled egg as an idle bird. The proverb 
an army marches on its stomach
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   12 1/29/07   5:12:17 PM
13
was fi rst recorded in 1578: “If I had not 
bene gathered from the tree in the budde, 
I should beeing blowne haue proued a 
blast, and as good as it is to bee an addle 
egge as an idle bird” (John Lyly, Euphues).
as is the father, so is the son  See like 
father, like son.
as is the mother, so is the daughter  See 
like mother, like daughter.
ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, 
and ye shall fi nd; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you  If you want some-
thing, take positive action to get it: Ask, 
and it shall be given you—don’t just sit there 
hoping that something will turn up. The 
proverb is of biblical origin, from Mat-
thew 7:7.
Variant of this proverb: them as asks, 
gits; them as don’t ask, don’t git.
ask advice, but use your own common 
sense  It is wise to ask for the advice of 
others when you need it, but foolish to 
follow that advice if your common sense 
suggests otherwise: Everybody says I should 
resign, but I think this is a bit rash—my 
policy is “Ask advice, but use your own com-
mon sense.”
ask a silly question and you get a silly 
answer  If you ask a question that cannot 
be answered, or to which the answer is 
obvious, you are likely to receive a face-
tious or nonsensical reply: I asked her what 
time I should expect her and she said, “When I 
arrive.” Ask a silly question and you get a silly 
answer! The proverb is based on a biblical 
quotation, “Answer a fool according to 
his folly, lest he be wise in his own con-
ceit” (Proverbs 26:5). Its current form is 
relatively recent; in earlier versions other 
words (such as foolish or strange) were 
used in place of silly.
Variant of this proverb: silly ques-
tion, silly answer.
ask me no questions and I’ll tell you 
no lies  It is better not to ask questions 
that somebody is likely to be unwilling 
to answer truthfully; used in response to 
such a question or simply to discourage an 
inquisitive person: “—Did she fall or was 
she pushed? he asked her. She answered, 
slighting:—Ask no questions and you’ll 
hear no lies” (James Joyce, Ulysses, 1922). 
The proverb originated in 1773, in Oliver 
Goldsmith’s She Stoops to Conquer: “Ask me 
no questions and I’ll tell you no fi bs.”
Variant of this proverb: ask no ques-
tions and hear no lies.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
curiosity killed the cat.
as Maine goes, so goes the nation  The 
members of a large group will follow the 
lead of an infl uential part of the group: 
They are worried that this crisis in the com-
puter industry may be just the beginning—as 
Maine goes, so goes the nation. The proverb 
originated in the late 19th or early 20th 
centuries, referring to state elections in 
Maine that were thought to predict how 
the subsequent national elections would 
go. Other words or place-names are some-
times substituted for Maine and nation, as 
in Crain’s New York Business (1994): “As Wall 
Street goes, so goes the New York offi ce 
market.”
Variant of this proverb: so goes 
Maine, so goes the nation.
as many men, as many opinions  See so 
many men, so many opinions.
 as many men, as many opinions
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   13 1/29/07   5:12:17 PM
14
as the day lengthens, so the cold strength-
ens  The coldest part of the winter often 
occurs in the period following the short-
est day, as the hours of daylight begin to 
grow longer: We usually get our worst frosts in 
January and February, proving the old saying “As 
the day lengthens, so the cold strengthens.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1631: “The 
New Year now begun, as the Days began to 
lengthen, so the Cold began to strengthen” 
(E. Pellham, God’s Power).
as the twig is bent, so is the tree 
inclined  A child’s early education and 
training are of great importance in deter-
mining the way he or she will grow up: It 
is never too soon to teach your children right 
from wrong—as the twig is bent, so is the tree 
inclined. The proverb originated in 1732, 
in Alexander Pope’s Epistles to Several Per-
sons: “’Tis Education forms the common 
mind,/Just as the Twig is bent, the Tree’s 
inclined.”
Variant of this proverb: as the twig is 
bent, the child will grow.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: nature passes nurture.
as you bake, so shall you brew  The 
way you begin determines whether you 
will do badly or well: As you bake, so shall 
you brew, and if you had worked harder at 
college you would have got a better job at the 
end of it. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1577: “As thou bakst, so shat brewe” 
(Misogonus).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
as you sow, so shall you reap.
as you brew, so shall you drink  People 
have to face the consequences of their 
actions: He built up his business by exploit-
ing his workforce, and now they have turned 
against him—as you brew, so shall you drink. 
The proverb occurs in a collection of 
13th-century poetry in the form “Let him 
habbe [have] as he brew, bale [misery] to 
dryng [drink].” From the 16th century 
onward the variant form became more 
frequent.
Variant of this proverb: as you brew, 
so shall you bake.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
as you make your bed, so you must lie 
in it.
as you make your bed, so you must lie in 
it  You must put up with the unpleasant 
results of a foolish action or decision: We 
disapprove of the young man our daughter is 
living with, and I told her not to come running 
home to us if he treats her badly. “As you make 
your bed, so you must lie in it,” I said. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with differ-
ent wording, c. 1590. A similar proverb 
was recorded in French a century earlier: 
“Comme on faict son lict, on le treuve [As one 
makes one’s bed, so one fi nds it].”
Variant of this proverb: you’ve made 
your bed, now lie in it.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
as you brew, so shall you drink.
as you sow, so shall you reap  The way 
you behave—badly or well—determines 
what will happen to you in the future: Her 
article offended a lot of important people, and 
now she fi nds herself ostracized—as you sow, so 
shall you reap. The proverb is of biblical ori-
gin: “whatsoever a man soweth, that shall 
he also reap. For he that soweth to his fl esh 
shall of the fl esh reap corruption; but he 
that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit 
reap life everlasting” (Galatians 6:7–8).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
as you bake, so shall you brew.
as the day lengthens, so the cold strengthens
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   14 1/29/07   5:12:17 PM
15
at night all cats are gray  See all cats 
are gray in the dark.
attack is the best form of defense  See 
the best defense is a good offense.
avoidance is the only remedy  Some-
times the only solution to a problem is to 
avoid it in the fi rst place: As we have no cure 
for the disease, avoidance is the only remedy. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1380 by 
Geoffrey Chaucer in Minor Poems.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: there’s a remedy for everything 
except death.
away goes the devil when he fi nds the 
door shut against him  Evil will never 
triumph if all temptations are rejected: 
The old lady prevented her daughter receiving 
male visitors, fi rmly believing that the devil 
goes away when he fi nds the door shut against 
him. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1659 by James Howell in Paroemiographia.
 away goes the devil when he fi nds the door shut against him
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   15 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
ååå   å
16
the back door robs the house  See a 
postern door makes a thief.
a bad excuse is better than none  It 
is better to give a poor or implausible 
excuse—which may, in fact, be believed—
than to have no explanation or justifi cation 
at all: On the basis that a bad excuse is better 
than none, I told him that I had accidentally put 
my essay in the mailbox. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1551: “This is as thei saie in 
English, better a badde excuse, then none at 
all” (Thomas Wilson, The Rule of Reason).
Variant of this proverb: a poor excuse 
is better than none.
a bad husband makes a bad wife  See a 
good husband makes a good wife.
bad money drives out good  The exis-
tence or availability of something infe-
rior or worthless—whether it be money, 
music, literature, or whatever—has a 
tendency to make things of better qual-
ity or greater value more scarce: “bad 
politics tends to drive out good politics 
just as bad money drives out good money” 
(Aldous Huxley, letter dated November 
18, 1933). Known as Gresham’s Law, 
this principle was suggested by the Eng-
lish fi nancier Sir Thomas Gresham (c. 
1519–79), who observed that the circu-
lation of coins made of low-value metal 
caused people to hoard those made of 
precious metal and thus remove them 
from circulation. Although Gresham may 
not have originated the idea, the principle 
was formulated as a theory and named in 
his honor by the Scottish economist H. D. 
MacLeod in 1858. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in its current form in 1902 in 
The New English Dictionary.
bad news always comes too soon  See 
he comes too early who brings bad 
news.
bad news travels fast  Bad news, or 
unfavorable gossip, tends to be dissemi-
nated far more quickly than good news, 
the implication being that people delight 
in talking or hearing about the misfor-
tunes of others: I know bad news travels fast, 
but I had only just got home from work when 
my sister phoned to ask if it was true that I had 
been fi red. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1592 (“Euill newes fl ie faster still than 
good” [Thomas Kyd, Spanish Tragedy]) but 
is probably of ancient origin.
Variant of this proverb: ill news 
comes apace.
a bad penny always turns up  Undesir-
able people will always return; often used 
b
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   16 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
17
when somebody who has left in disgrace 
reappears after a long absence: I hear her 
ex-husband’s back in town—a bad penny 
always turns up. First recorded in 1766 
as a simile, in a letter written by Abigail 
Adams, it subsequently occurred in Sir 
Walter Scott’s Redgauntlet (1824) in the 
form “the bad shilling is sure enough to 
come back again.”
Variant of this proverb: a bad penny 
always comes back.
a bad workman quarrels with his 
tools  Workers who lack skill or com-
petence blame their tools or equipment 
when things go wrong: He apologized for 
the rough edges on some of the panels, say-
ing that his saw was blunt—a bad workman 
always quarrels with his tools. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English, with dif-
ferent wording, in 1611. However, the 
French had a similar proverb in the late 
13th century: “Mauvés ovriers ne trovera ja 
bon hostill [A bad workman will never fi nd 
a good tool].” The U.S. writer Ambrose 
Bierce parodied the proverb in his Devil’s 
Dictionary (1911): “A bad workman quar-
rels with the man who calls him that.”
Variant of this proverb: a bad work-
man blames his tools.
a barking dog never bites  People who 
make the most or the loudest threats 
are the least likely to take action: “‘De 
la poigne et des formes,’ cried the stout 
general, ‘de la poigne surtout.’ And to 
translate into Russian; be civil, but don’t 
spare your fi sts.” “‘Ah, you’re a ras-
cal, an incorrigible rascal,’ interposed 
the condescending general. ‘Mesdames, 
don’t listen to him, please. A barking dog 
does not bite’” (Ivan Turgenev, Smoke, 
1867). First recorded in French in the 
13th century, the proverb features in a 
popular 20th-century joke about a man 
who is reluctant to enter premises where 
a dog is barking loudly. On being assured 
that “A barking never bites,” he replies, “I 
know that and you know that, but does 
the dog know that?”
Variants of this proverb: dogs that 
bark don’t always bite; barking dogs sel-
dom bite.
a bawling cow soon forgets her own 
calf  See a bellowing cow soon for-
gets her calf.
a bayonet is a weapon with a worker 
at each end  The weapons of war are 
used by ordinary people against ordinary 
people: Although I knew I was fi ghting the 
enemies of my country, my conscience kept 
reminding me of the saying that a bayonet 
is a weapon with a worker at each end. The 
proverb originated in 1940 as a British 
pacifi st slogan.
bear and forbear  Patience, tolerance, 
endurance, and forgiveness are valuable 
qualities in all walks of life: “‘Davie, ye’ll 
have to try and forgive me.’ ‘O man, let’s 
say no more about it! . . . We’re neither 
one of us to mend the other—that’s the 
truth! We must just bear and forbear’” 
(Robert Louis Stevenson, Kidnapped, 
1886). First recorded in this form in 
1573, the proverb is probably of ancient 
origin: the Greek philosopher Epictetus 
(fi rst century a.d.) wrote “be patient and 
endure.” In its early use the proverb was 
often put forward as a formula for harmo-
nious married life.
Variant of this proverb: you must 
take two bears to live with you—bear 
and forbear.
 bear and forbear
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   17 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
18
beauty and honesty seldom agree  It is 
rare for a person to be both good-looking 
and honest: “Beawtie and honesty seldome 
agree, for of beautie comes temptation, of 
temptation dishonour (John Florio, Sec-
ond Frutes, 1591). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1580 by John Lyly in Euphues 
and his England.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
beauty is only skin deep.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: beauty is truth, truth beauty.
beauty draws with a single hair  A beau-
tiful woman has great powers of attraction: 
“Fair tresses man’s imperial race insnare,/
And beauty draws us with a single hair” 
(Alexander Pope, The Rape of the Lock, 
1714). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1591, in John Florio’s Second Fruits: “Ten 
teems of oxen draw much less,/Than 
doth one haire of Helens tresse.”
Variant of this proverb: beauty draws 
more than oxen.
beauty is a good letter of introduc-
tion  Beautiful people make a better 
fi rst impression on strangers than ugly 
people do: She doesn’t know anybody in 
the town, but if it’s true that beauty is a 
good letter of introduction, then she’ll have 
no diffi culty making friends. This proverb 
is recorded as a regional expression in 
the USA.
beauty is but a blossom  Good looks do 
not last: “As there is no true cuckold but 
calamity, so beauty’s a fl ower” (William 
Shakespeare, Twelfth Night, 1:5). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1616 by T. Draxe 
in Bibliotheca Scholastica.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: a thing of beauty is a joy forever.
beauty is in the eye of the beholder  The 
perception of beauty is subjective, and 
not everybody fi nds the same people or 
things attractive: “‘Answer, O my Gul-
Bahar, more beautiful growing as the 
days multiply!’ ‘Thou fl atterer! Do I not 
know beauty is altogether in the eye of 
the beholder, and that all persons do not 
see alike?’” (Lewis Wallace, Prince of India, 
1893). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in the late 18th century, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of much earlier 
origin. Compare Theocritus (c. 308–c. 
240 b.c.), “in the eyes of love that which is 
not beautiful often seems beautiful.”
beauty is no inheritance  Good looks 
are not necessarily passed on from gen-
eration to generation: It took only one look 
at mother and daughter to confi rm the truth 
behind the saying “beauty is no inheritance.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1633 
by T. Draxe in Bibliotheca Scholastica, in the 
variant form “beauty is no heritage.”
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: like father, like son; like mother, 
like daughter.
beauty is only skin deep  Beauty is only 
a superfi cial quality, and may conceal an 
unpleasant character or nature: He was one 
of the many men who forget that beauty is only 
skin deep and fi nd themselves fi ling for divorce 
after a couple of years of marriage. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1613. In 1960 
Jean Kerr wrote, in The Snake Has All the 
Lines, “I’m tired of all this nonsense about 
beauty being only skin deep. That’s deep 
enough. What do you want—an adorable 
pancreas?”
Variant of this proverb: beauty is 
only skin deep, but goodness goes to the 
bone.
beauty and honesty seldom agree
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   18 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
19
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
beauty and honesty seldom agree.
beauty is truth, truth beauty  The 
qualities of beauty and truth are, or 
should be, inseparable and interlinked; 
often used when real life falls short of 
this ideal: “Beauty is truth, truth beauty,” 
but there is nothing beautiful about the 
truths that have been exposed in this sordid 
affair. The proverb originated in 1819, in 
John Keats’s poem Ode on a Grecian Urn: 
“‘Beauty is truth, truth beauty,’—that is 
all/Ye know on earth, and all ye need 
to know.”
be careful what you wish for: you might 
get it  See don’t wish too hard; you 
might just get what you wished for.
because a man is born in a stable that 
does not make him a horse  See the man 
who is born in a stable is not a horse.
beggars can’t be choosers  We must 
accept with gratitude and without com-
plaint what we are given when we do not 
have the means or opportunity to provide 
ourselves with something better: “. . . it’s 
a shame we got to entertain you in such a 
cramped place. And there ain’t any water 
except that ole iron sink outside in the hall, 
but . . . beggars can’t be choosers” (Sinclair 
Lewis, Main Street, 1920). First recorded in 
1546, the proverb formerly had must not or 
should not in place of can’t.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: never look a gift horse in the 
mouth; when all fruit fails, welcome 
haws.
be happy while you’re living, for you’re 
a long time dead  Make the most of life 
during the relatively short period that it 
lasts: My philosophy is “Be happy while you’re 
living, for you’re a long time dead,” and I try 
not to let things get me down. The origin of 
this proverb is the Scottish motto for a 
house: “Be happy while y’er leevin,/For 
y’er a lang time deid.”
behind every great man is a great woman 
Important or successful men often owe 
their status or success to the support of a 
female partner or colleague: They say that 
behind every great man there is a great woman, 
but the new head of the corporation—a con-
fi rmed bachelor—seems to be an exception to 
that rule.
be just before you’re generous  You 
should make sure all your debts are paid 
and other obligations met before you 
start giving money away or living extrava-
gantly: “I owe every farthing of my money. 
. . . There’s an old proverb—be just 
before you’re generous” (Captain Marryat, 
Peter Simple, 1834). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1745, but with the implication 
that it was already in general use.
be kind to your friends; if it weren’t for 
them, you would be a total stranger  You 
cannot afford to lose your friends by treat-
ing them badly, because without them you 
would be alone in society: I think you 
should invite her to stay with you for a few 
days—be kind to your friends; if it weren’t for 
them, you would be a total stranger.
believe only half of what you see and 
nothing you hear  Do not be too ready 
to believe all the evidence of your eyes 
and ears; used as a warning to beware of 
false appearances and rumors: “Diplomats 
arriving in Haiti are told to believe ‘noth-
 believe only half of what you see and nothing you hear
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   19 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
20
ing you hear and only half of what you 
see’” (New York Times, 1994). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1845, but the senti-
ment it expresses dates from c. 1300 or 
earlier. The verb read is sometimes substi-
tuted for see or hear.
Variant of this proverb: believe noth-
ing of what you hear, and only half of what 
you see.
a believer is a songless bird in a 
cage  Religious belief restricts a per-
son’s freedom of action and expression: 
When asked why she never went to church, my 
aunt would always reply with the saying “A 
believer is a songless bird in a cage.”  The prov-
erb originated in a speech made in 1873 
by the U.S. lawyer, orator, and agnostic 
Robert Green Ingersoll.
believing has a core of unbelieving  Be-
lief and unbelief are closely related, and 
sometimes you need to start from a posi-
tion of skepticism to arrive at the truth: 
Believing has a core of unbelieving, and they 
eventually accepted what had fi rst appeared to 
be an incredible explanation of the phenom-
enon. The proverb originated in Robert 
Buchanan’s Songs of Seeking (c. 1866).
a bellowing cow soon forgets her 
calf  The loudest laments or complaints 
are often the fi rst to subside; used spe-
cifi cally of those whose mourning seems 
excessive: “When a woman, newly wid-
owed, had tried to throw herself into her 
husband’s grave . . . someone . . . said 
. . . ‘Ah, you wait. The bellowing cow’s 
always the fi rst to forget its calf’” (Flora 
Thompson, Lark Rise to Candleford, 1945). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1895, 
but with the implication that it had long 
been in regional use.
Variant of this proverb: a bawling 
cow soon forgets her own calf.
be longing   See an idle youth, a needy 
age.
be nice to people on your way up 
because you’ll meet them on your way 
down  Try to avoid making enemies as 
you rise in your chosen career, because 
you may need the help of the same people 
if you fi nd yourself descending through 
the ranks again: “The man whose posture 
is servile in the presence of his superiors 
and rude or off-hand with his subordi-
nates has forgotten the old chestnut ‘Be 
nice to the little man on your way up, 
you might meet him on your way down’” 
(Milla Alihan, Corporate Etiquette, 1974). 
Of U.S. origin, the proverb is believed 
to have been coined by either Wilson 
Mizner (1876–1933) or Jimmy Durante 
(1893–1980).
be not idle and you shall not be 
longing   See an idle youth, a needy 
age.
the best art conceals art  Artistic excel-
lence lies in making something that is 
subtle or intricate in construction appear 
simple and streamlined: “In oratory the 
greatest art is to hide art” (Jonathan Swift, 
Faculty of Mind, 1707). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English c. 1583, with dif-
ferent wording, but is obviously of earlier 
origin. It also exists in the Latin form “Ars 
est celare artem.”
Variant of this proverb: art consists 
in concealing art.
the best defense is a good offense  You 
are more likely to win if you take the 
a believer is a songless bird in a cage
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   20 1/29/07   5:12:18 PM
21
initiative and make an attack rather than 
preparing to defend yourself; used in 
sport, politics, business, and the like: “The 
reigning corporate strategy these days is 
that the best defense is a good offense” 
(Washington Post, 1997). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in the late 18th century, and 
the sentiment it expresses is found in the 
writings of George Washington (1799): 
“Make them believe, that offensive opera-
tions, often times, is the surest . . . means 
of defense.”
Variant of this proverb: attack is the 
best form of defense.
the best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, 
and Dr. Merryman  The best recipe for 
good health consists of eating and drink-
ing sensibly and having plenty of rest and 
recreation: Many modern ills are caused by 
the junk food we eat and the hectic pace of our 
working lives. We should follow the advice of our 
great-grandparents, who believed that the best 
doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, and Dr. Mer-
ryman. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1558. “I should not staye my selfe vpon the 
opinion of any one phisicion, but rather 
vpon three. . . . The fi rst was called doctor 
diet, the seconde doctor quiet, the thirde 
doctor mery man” (W. Bullein, Government 
of Health).
Variant of this proverb: the three 
doctors Diet, Quiet, and Temperance are 
the best physicians.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
diet cures more than doctors.
the best is the enemy of the good  By 
constantly striving for the best we risk 
destroying, or failing to produce, some-
thing good: “To maintain that all that a 
school provides must be provided free 
makes the best the enemy of the good” 
(London Times, 1981). First recorded in 
English in 1861, the proverb may be of 
French, Italian, or Spanish origin.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: the good is the enemy of the best; 
if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth 
doing well.
the best is yet to be  No matter how 
good or bad the present may seem, some-
thing better lies ahead in the future: Long-
term economic forecasts suggest that the best is 
yet to be. The proverb originated in 1864, 
in Robert Browning’s poem Rabbi Ben 
Ezra: “Grow old along with me!/The best 
is yet to be,/The last of life, for which 
the fi rst was made:/Our times are in His 
hand.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the worst is yet to come.
the best-laid schemes of mice and men 
gang aft a-gley  There is always the 
possibility that things will go wrong, 
no matter how carefully you make your 
plans: I thought I had everything organized 
for the party, but the best-laid schemes of 
mice and men gang aft a-gley—the cater-
ers delivered the food to the wrong address! 
The proverb comes from Robert Burns’s 
poem To a Mouse (1786). The Scottish 
phrase gang aft a-gley means “often go 
awry.” In general use, the proverb is 
often shortened, and plans may be sub-
stituted for schemes.
Variant of this proverb: the best-laid 
schemes of mice and men oft go astray.
the best of friends must part  Friends 
cannot always be together, and not all 
friendships last a lifetime: “‘Aren’t there 
going to be any more lessons?’ . . . ‘The 
best of friends must part’” (William 
 the best of friends must part
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   21 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
22
Golding, Darkness Visible, 1979). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1611, but a simi-
lar sentiment was expressed by Chaucer 
in Troilus and Criseyde (c. 1385). It features 
in the traditional song “There is a Tavern 
in the Town”: “Fare thee well, for I must 
leave thee,/Do not let this parting grieve 
thee,/And remember that the best of 
friends must part.”
Variant of this proverb: even the best 
of friends must part.
the best of men are but men at 
best  Even the greatest people have their 
failings and limitations: Although it is said 
that the best of men are but men at best, the 
nation has a right to expect greater integrity 
from its head of state. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in John Aubrey’s Brief Lives 
(1877), as a saying of General John Lam-
bert (1619–84).
Variant of this proverb: the best of 
men are but men after all.
the best place for criticism is in front of 
your mirror  Before you criticize others, 
you should fi rst take a close look at your-
self: If she starts harping on again about the 
faults of her sister, I shall be tempted to remind 
her that the best place for criticism is in front 
of your own mirror.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the pot calls the kettle black.
the best things come in small packages 
Size has no bearing on quality, and a small 
container may hold something of great 
value; often said by or to a short person: 
When teased about her height, she would 
always reply, “The best things come in small 
packages.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1877 in a letter by B. Farjeon, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
general use. Other words and phrases may 
be substituted for the best things, including 
diamonds and dynamite.
Variant of this proverb: good things 
come in small packages.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
small is beautiful.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the larger the body, the bigger 
the heart.
the best things in life are free  The 
most rewarding or satisfying experiences 
in life are often those that cost nothing; 
also used of the wonders of nature or 
of abstract qualities such as health and 
friendship: The best things in life are free, and 
what could be better than a brisk walk across 
the hill on a sunny winter’s morning? The 
proverb originated in 1927 as the title 
of a song, which contains the following 
lines: “The moon belongs to everyone,/
The best things in life are free,/The stars 
belong to everyone,/They gleam there 
for you and me.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money isn’t everything.
the best way to get even is to forget  It 
can be more effective to suggest an insult 
or injury has had no lasting impact than 
it would be to retaliate: “She thought 
about writing him a dismissive letter 
about disloyalty, but then remembered 
that the best way to get even is to forget.” 
Though a relatively recent introduction in 
this form, similar sentiments have been 
expressed for centuries.
Variant of this proverb: to forget a 
wrong is the best revenge.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: neglect will kill an injury 
sooner than revenge.
the best of men are but men at best
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   22 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
23
be the day weary or be the day long, at 
last it ringeth to evensong  No matter 
how tiring or stressful a day you are having, 
you can console yourself with the fact that 
it will eventually be over; also used more 
generally to recommend perseverance or 
endurance in a trying situation: Whenever 
she felt things were getting me down, my mother 
would remind me that “be the day weary or be 
the day long, at last it ringeth to evensong.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1509. “For 
thoughe the day, be neuer so longe, At last 
the belles ryngeth to euensonge” (Stephen 
Hawes, Pastime of Pleasure).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: it’s a long road that has no 
turning; the longest day must have 
an end.
better a big fi sh in a little pond than a lit-
tle fi sh in a big pond  It is better to have 
a position of importance in a small organi-
zation than to be an unimportant member 
of a large group: She turned down the offer of 
a job with one of the largest multinationals in 
the industry, on the basis that it is better to be a 
big fi sh in a little pond than a little fi sh in a big 
pond. The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
Variant of this proverb: better a big 
fi sh in a little puddle than a little fi sh in a 
big puddle.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
better be the head of a dog than the 
tail of a lion.
better a dinner of herbs where love is 
than a stalled ox where hate is  It is 
better to be poor or dine badly in a loving 
environment than to eat well or have a 
wealthy lifestyle in an atmosphere of dis-
cord or hatred: “Lunch was a silent affair. 
. . . I said, ‘Better a dinner of herbs than a 
stalled ox where hate is’” (J. Drummond, 
I Saw Him Die, 1979). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Better is a dinner of herbs 
where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred 
therewith” (Proverbs 15:17).
better a good cow than a cow of a good 
kind  A person’s character is of more 
importance than his or her family back-
ground: He was afraid his parents might be 
disappointed in his fi ancée, an ordinary girl 
who had worked to support her unemployed 
parents since her mid-teens, but his mother 
later voiced her approval—in private—with 
the remark, “Better a good cow than a cow of a 
good kind.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1922, but with the implication that it 
was already in general use.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
kind hearts are more than coronets.
better a little fi re to warm us than a big 
one to burn us  Sometimes it is more 
desirable to have only a small amount of 
something: We must not be too dissatisfi ed 
with the size of our inheritance—better a little 
fi re to warm us than a big one to burn us. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1510. “Then 
better is small fi re one easyly to warme 
Then is a great fi re to do one hurt or 
harme” (Alexander Barclay, Eclogues).
better be an old man’s darling than a 
young man’s slave  It is better to marry 
an older man who will cherish you than to 
choose a younger husband who may treat 
you badly: “Let defeated rivals snarling,/
 Talk of one foot in the grave,/Better be an 
old man’s darling,/Than become a young 
man’s slave” (James Robinson Planché, 
Love and Fortune, 1859). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546, but with the impli-
cation that it was of much earlier origin. 
 better be an old man’s darling than a young man’s slave
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   23 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
24
At this time it had the rhyming words der-
lyng in place of darling and werlyng (mean-
ing “object of scorn”) in place of slave.
Variant of this proverb: better be 
a poor man’s darling than a rich man’s 
slave.
better be dead than out of fashion  See 
better be out of the world than out 
of the fashion.
better be envied than pitied  It is pref-
erable to have possessions or attributes 
that arouse envy in others than to be 
pitied for having little or nothing: I was 
aware that my good fortune might provoke 
resentment among my friends, but “Better be 
envied than pitied,” I always say. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English in 1546, but 
the sentiment it expresses is probably 
of ancient Greek origin. Compare Pin-
dar (c. 522–443 b.c.), “envy is stronger 
than pity,” and Herodotus (c. 480–c. 425 
b.c.), “it is better to be envied than to be 
pitied.”
better be fi rst in a village than second 
at Rome  It is better to be in charge in 
a small community or company than it is 
to be in a secondary position in a larger 
concern: “I should be like Caesar . . . and 
choose rather to be the fi rst man of the 
village, than second at Rome” (Abraham 
Cowley, Essays, 1668). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1542 by Nich-
olas Udall in Apothegms of Erasmus, but was 
originally a Roman saying, supposedly 
quoted by Julius Caesar in relation to his 
post as ruler of Gaul.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: the highest branch is not the saf-
est roost; uneasy lies the head that 
wears the crown.
better be out of the world than out of 
the fashion  Some people are so intent 
on following fashion that it seems they 
would rather die than do otherwise; also 
used with the implication that something 
that is not fashionable might as well not 
exist: “Women seem seldom hindered by 
lack of money when it is a case of follow-
my-leader. ‘Better be out of the world 
than out of the fashion’” (E. F. Maitland, 
From Window in Chelsea, 1903). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1639.
Variant of this proverb: better be 
dead than out of fashion.
better be the head of a dog than the tail 
of a lion  It is preferable to lead a rela-
tively minor group of people than to have 
an inferior position in a more important 
body: “The ancient . . . spirit of English-
men was once expressed by our proverb, 
‘Better be the head of a dog than the tail of 
a lion’; i.e. the fi rst of the yeomanry rather 
than the last of the gentry” (Isaac D’Israeli, 
Curiosities of Literature, 1791–1834). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1599. The 
earliest versions of the proverb had fox, 
mouse, or lizard in place of dog.
Variant of this proverb: better be the 
head of an ass than the tail of a horse.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
better a big fish in a little pond than 
a little fish in a big pond.
better death than dishonor  People 
should be prepared to give up their lives 
to avoid dishonor; used specifi cally in 
warfare and also more generally, as when 
the collapse of a business seems more 
desirable than a loss of integrity: “‘What 
was the old soldier’s code?’ Cortez asked 
himself. ‘Death before dishonor’” (Tom 
Clancy, Clear and Present Danger, 1989). 
better be dead than out of fashion
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   24 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
25
The fi rst recorded reference to the prov-
erb is in P. Wylie’s Murderer Invisible (1931), 
but it is probably of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: death before 
dishonor.
better late than never  It is better that 
somebody arrives or something happens 
later than expected or desired, than not 
at all: “I’m sick of these disgusting women 
I’ve spent my life with . . . and I’m rather 
anxious to settle down. A bit late in the 
day, perhaps, but better late than never” 
(George Orwell, A Clergyman’s Daughter, 
1935). First recorded in English c. 1330, 
the proverb is probably of ancient Roman 
origin. The phrase “but better never late” 
is often added or said in response to the 
proverb.
better luck next time  Hopefully things 
will go better for you next time: “Better 
luck next time,” said the dealer as he scooped up 
the chips. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1834 by Captain Frederick Marryat in 
Jacob Faithful. 
better one house spoiled than two  It 
is a good thing for two bad, foolish, or 
otherwise undesirable people to become 
husband and wife and thus avoid caus-
ing trouble in two separate marriages: I 
was pleased to hear that our neighbor’s awful 
son is marrying that dreadful girl from the 
fl orist’s—better one house spoiled than two! 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, with dif-
ferent wording, in 1586.
better safe than sorry  It is wiser to 
take precautions—even if they seem 
unnecessary or excessive—than to risk 
disaster: I went around the building one last 
time to check that all the doors and windows 
were locked—better safe than sorry. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1837, in Samuel 
Lover’s novel Rory O’More, with sure in 
place of safe.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s better to be on the safe side.
better something than nothing  See 
something is better than nothing.
the better the day, the better the 
deed  An action is of greater value 
because it is performed on a holy day; 
often used to justify working on Sunday, 
Good Friday, or Christmas Day: “The bet-
ter the day, the better the deed . . . It was 
only the Pharisees who objected to any 
necessary work being done on the Sab-
bath” (J. C. Hutcheson, Crown and Anchor, 
1896). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English in 1607. A similar proverb was 
recorded in French three centuries ear-
lier: “A bon jour bone euvre [For a good day, 
a good deed].”
better the devil you know than the devil 
you don’t know  It is often preferable 
to choose or stay with people or things 
you know, despite their faults, than to 
risk replacing them with somebody or 
something new but possibly less desir-
able: She was surprised that I was using the 
same builders again, after the problems I’d 
had with them last time, but better the devil 
you know than the devil you don’t know. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1857, in Anthony Trollope’s novel 
Barchester Towers: “‘Better the d— you 
know than the d— you don’t know,’ is 
an old saying . . . but the bishop had not 
yet realised the truth of it.” Compare 
the ancient Latin proverb “nota res mala, 
optima [an evil thing known is best].”
 better the devil you know than the devil you don’t know
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   25 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
26
better three hours too soon than a 
minute too late  See it’s better to be 
an hour too early than a minute too 
late.
better to wear out than to rust out  It is 
better to be exhausted by hard work than 
to remain idle; used by people accused of 
working too hard, especially old people 
who choose to remain active: Our gardener 
is in his eighties but has no plans to retire just 
yet—“Better to wear out than to rust out,” 
he says. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in this form in 1820, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of much earlier origin. In 
Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, Part 2 (1:2), 
Sir John Falstaff presents the opposite 
viewpoint: “I were better to be eaten to 
death with a rust than to be scoured to 
nothing with perpetual motion.”
between two stools one falls to the 
ground  Failure to choose between alter-
native courses of action, or to align your-
self with one of two opposing groups, 
may lead to disastrous consequences: You 
must make up your mind which job to accept, 
or they will both go to other people—between 
two stools one falls to the ground. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1390, with different 
wording, a version c. 1530 being closer to 
the modern form: “Between two stools, 
the arse goes to ground.” A similar senti-
ment is expressed in the medieval Latin 
proverb “labitur enitens sellis herere duabus 
[he falls trying to sit on two seats].” In 
modern times the proverb is more fre-
quently used in the form of the fi gurative 
phrase to fall between two stools.
Variant of this proverb: between two 
stools we come to the ground.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: when in doubt, do nothing.
beware of an oak, it draws the stroke; 
avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; creep 
under the thorn, it can save you from 
harm  It is dangerous to shelter from 
lightning under the oak, ash, or other 
trees: At the fi rst sound of thunder I made for 
the shelter of the hut, remembering my mother’s 
warning: “Beware of an oak, it draws the stroke; 
avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash.” This is a 
piece of ancient folklore that was fi rst 
recorded in 1878.
beware of Greeks bearing gifts  It is 
wise to be suspicious of offers or friendly 
gestures made by enemies or opponents: 
Remembering the saying “Beware of Greeks 
bearing gifts,” I decided to reject the invita-
tion of my professional rival, even at the risk 
of offending him. The proverb comes from 
Virgil’s Aeneid (fi rst century b.c.), “timeo 
Danaos, et dona ferentes [I fear the Greeks, 
even when bringing gifts],” a warning 
given to the Trojans when a large wooden 
horse (fi lled with Greek soldiers) was 
delivered to the gates of their city. An 
early reference to the proverb in English 
occurs in Anthony Trollope’s novel Phineas 
Redux (1873): “He would remind the 
right honourable gentleman that presents 
from Greeks had ever been considered 
dangerous.”
Variant of this proverb: fear the 
Greeks bearing gifts.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: never look a gift horse in the 
mouth.
be what you would seem to be  Your 
appearance should refl ect your true 
nature, and vice versa: “It’s a vegetable. 
It doesn’t look like one, but it is. . . . 
The moral of that is—‘Be what you 
would seem to be’” (Lewis Carroll, Alice’s 
better three hours too soon than a minute too late
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   26 1/29/07   5:12:19 PM
27
Adventures in Wonderland, 1865). An early 
example is “Suche as thow semest in 
syghte, be in assay [trial] y-founde” (Wil-
liam Langland, Piers Plowman, c. 1377), 
although the sentiment is found in classi-
cal sources such as Aeschylus.
Variant of this proverb: be what you 
appear to be.
big fi sh eat little fi sh  Small organiza-
tions or insignifi cant people tend to be 
swallowed up or destroyed by those that 
are greater and more powerful: Only a 
handful of independent companies have sur-
vived in this competitive industry, where the 
big fi sh eat the little fi sh. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in a text dating from before 
1200. In Shakespeare’s play Pericles (2:1), 
the following exchange occurs between 
two fi shermen: “‘Master, I marvel how 
the fi shes live in the sea.’ ‘Why, as men do 
a-land—the great ones eat up the little 
ones.’”
big fl eas have little fl eas upon their 
backs to bite ’em, and little fl eas have 
lesser fl eas, and so ad infi nitum  In a 
hierarchy of size or importance, every 
member is affected by or dependent on 
the one above or below, and the hierarchy 
BIBLICAL PROVERBS
Many proverbs in common use today began as quotations from the Bible. The following list 
includes a selection of some of the best-known of these.
As a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool returns to his folly (Proverbs)
The borrower is servant to the lender (Proverbs)
Faith moves mountains (1 Corinthians)
A good name is better than precious ointment (Ecclesiastes)
It is more blessed to give than to receive (Acts)
The labourer is worthy of his hire (Luke)
Many are called but few are chosen (Matthew)
No man can serve two masters (Matthew)
Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar’s; and unto God the 
things that are God’s (Matthew)
Seek and ye shall fi nd (Matthew)
A soft answer turneth away wrath (Proverbs)
Sow the wind and reap the whirlwind (Hosea)
Spare the rod and spoil the child (Proverbs)
Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant (Proverbs)
There is nothing new under the sun (Ecclesiastes)
The spirit is willing but the fl esh is weak (Matthew)
The wages of sin is death (Romans)
The wind bloweth where it listeth (John)
Wisdom is more precious than rubies (Proverbs)
You cannot make bricks without straw (Exodus)
You cannot serve God and Mammon (Matthew)
åååååbig fl eas have little fl eas upon their backs to bite ’em, and little fl eas have lesser . . .
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   27 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
28
stretches to infi nity in both directions: 
Even a company of this size risks fi nancial 
disaster if one of its suppliers has prob-
lems—big fl eas have little fl eas, and so on. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1733, 
with different wording, in the satirical 
advice to a poet On Poetry, A Rhapsody by 
Jonathan Swift. Its current form comes 
from a 19th-century rhyme that contin-
ues: “And the great fl eas themselves, in 
turn, have greater fl eas to go on;/While 
these again have greater still, and greater 
still, and so on.”
the bigger they are, the harder they 
fall  The downfall of a great or impor-
tant person is more painful and cata-
strophic than that of a lesser person: “‘You 
are just a youth,’ he observed at last, ‘and he 
has been a great man of war from his boy-
hood. . . .’ ‘The bigger they are,’ I replied, 
‘the harder they fall’” (Joseph Heller, God 
Knows, 1984). The proverb in its current 
form is attributed to the heavyweight boxer 
Robert Fitzsimmons (1858–1917), but the 
sentiment it expresses was fi rst recorded 
in English as early as 1493. Compare the 
Roman poet Claudian (fourth century 
a.d.), “Tolluntur in altum/Ut lapsu graviore 
ruant [men are raised on high in order that 
they may fall more heavily].”
Variant of this proverb: the bigger 
they come, the harder they fall.
big is beautiful  There are advantages to 
large size: The success of this huge conglomer-
ate only goes to prove that big is beautiful. A 
U.S. proverb that became current from 
the 1960s, it is commonly applied in 
discussions of economies of scale in com-
mercial contexts.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: small is beautiful.
a bird in the hand is worth two in the 
bush  Something you have for certain 
now is of more value than something 
better you may get, especially if you 
risk losing what you have in order to get 
it: “More money might be obtained by 
selling the packages, but there was risk 
in this. Besides, it would take time, and 
they decided that a bird in the hand was 
worth two in the bush” (Horatio Alger, 
Paul the Peddler, 1871). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English c. 1450, with 
different wording, but the sentiment it 
expresses can be found in the fables of 
Aesop in the sixth century b.c. The cur-
rent form dates from no later than 1581. 
The U.S. actress Mae West parodied the 
proverb when she said, “A man in the 
house is worth two in the street,” in the 
movie Belle of the Nineties (1934).
Variant of this proverb: a bird in the 
hand is worth a hundred fl ying.
a bird never fl ew on one wing  Some-
thing extra or additional is required; often 
used to hint that another drink or some 
more money would be welcome: Let’s have 
another drop of whiskey before we go—a bird 
never fl ew on one wing. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1721, with different wording, 
in a collection of Scottish proverbs. It is 
found in the writings of 20th-century Irish 
writers, notably Sean O’Casey.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t fl y 
with one wing.
birds in their little nests agree  People 
who live or work together should try to do 
so in harmony; often used to stop children 
from arguing: “‘I detest rude, unlady-
like girls!’ ‘I hate affected, niminy-piminy 
chits!’ ‘Birds in their little nests agree,’ 
sang Beth, the peacemaker, with such a 
the bigger they are, the harder they fall
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   28 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
29
funny face that both sharp voices softened 
to a laugh, and the ‘pecking’ ended for 
that time” (Louisa May Alcott, Little Women, 
1868). The proverb originated in Isaac 
Watts’s Divine Songs for Children (1715): 
“Birds in their little Nests agree;/And ’tis 
a shameful Sight,/When Children of one 
Family/Fall out, and chide, and fi ght.”
birds of a feather fl ock together  People 
tend to associate with those of similar 
character, interests, or opinions; often 
used with derogatory implications: “Who 
are the guys that mostly get asked to the 
clubs? Preppies from St. Paul’s, Mark’s, 
Groton. It’s kind of a common bond. You 
know, birds of a feather fl ocking together 
and so forth” (Erich Segal, The Class, 1985). 
The proverb dates from the 16th century 
or earlier in this form, but the sentiment it 
expresses is found in the Apocrypha “The 
birds will resort unto their like” (Ecclesi-
asticus 27:9). It also occurs in a translation 
of Plato’s dialogues by Benjamin Jowett, 
published in 1871: “The old proverb says 
that ‘birds of a feather fl ock together’; 
I suppose that equality of years inclines 
them to the same pleasures, and similarity 
begets friendship; yet you may have more 
than enough even of this.” Some writers 
have substituted other verbs for fl ock, as in 
“birds of a feather laugh together” (James 
Joyce, Ulysses, 1922) and “birds of a feather 
fi ght together [that is, on the same side]” 
(Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, 1863–69).
Variant of this proverb: birds of a 
feather fl y together.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: like attracts like; a man is known 
by the company he keeps.
the bird that can sing and won’t sing 
should be made to sing  See little 
birds that can sing and won’t sing 
must be made to sing.
birth is much but breeding more  A 
person’s upbringing counts for more in 
the long run than the traits of character he 
or she was born with: If it is true that birth 
is much but breeding more then even such an 
unpromising beginning as this should not have 
any lasting effect upon the child’s prospects. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 by 
John Clarke in Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: nature passes nurture.
the biter is sometimes bit  Those who 
criticize or otherwise set about others 
are not immune from criticism or other 
attack themselves: “The biter was bit: 
the fox . . . was caught” (Charles Reade, 
Hard Cash, 1863). Quoted by Lucian, 
it was fi rst recorded in English in 1693 
by Thomas D’Urfey in The Richmond 
Duchess.
a bleating sheep loses a bite  Those who 
talk too much may miss an important 
opportunity: “He said something about a 
bleating sheep losing a bite; but I should 
think this young man is not much of a 
talker” (Ted Hughes, Tom Brown at Oxford, 
1861). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1599, with wording closer to that of the 
variant form.
Variant of this proverb: the sheep 
that bleats loses a mouthful.
blessed are the dead that the rain rains 
on  According to popular superstition, 
rainfall during a funeral is a blessing 
on the corpse: The old saying “Blessed are 
the dead that the rain rains on” was of little 
consolation to the mourners caught out by the 
 blessed are the dead that the rain rains on
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   29 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
30
downpour as they crossed the graveyard. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1607.
blessed are they who expect nothing, 
for they shall not be disappointed  It is 
better to have no expectations of happi-
ness or good fortune if you want to avoid 
suffering the pangs of disappointment: 
“‘Oh, Marilla, looking forward to things 
is half the pleasure of them,’ exclaimed 
Anne. ‘. . . Mrs. Lynde says, “Blessed are 
they who expect nothing for they shall 
not be disappointed.” But I think it would 
be worse to expect nothing than to be 
disappointed’” (Lucy Maud Montgomery, 
Anne of Green Gables, 1908). The proverb 
dates from the 1720s, when it was quoted 
by the writer Alexander Pope as “a ninth 
Beatitude” in some of his letters.
Variant of this proverb: expect noth-
ing and you won’t be disappointed.
blessed is the bride that the sun shines 
on See happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on.
blessings brighten as they take their 
fl ight  People often fail to appreciate 
the good things that they have until they 
lose them: “Blessings brighten as they take 
their fl ight. Katy began to appreciate for 
the fi rst time how much she had learned 
to rely on her aunt” (Susan Coolidge, 
What Katy Did, 1873). The proverb comes 
from the poem “Night Thoughts” (1742) 
by Edward Young.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
the cow knows not the value of her 
tail till she has lost it; you never miss 
the water till the well runs dry.
blind chance sweeps the world 
along  Life is governed by chance rather 
than by destiny: She believed in the saying 
“Blind chance sweeps the world along,” and was 
confi dent that her luck would change one of 
these days. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1948 in a U.S. proverb collection.
a blind man’s wife needs no paint  At-
tempts to improve the appearance of 
somebody or something are superfl uous 
when it is the true nature of the person 
or thing that is of value, or when the 
improvements will not be appreciated: 
The cosmetics industry would founder if every 
woman took on board the adage that a blind 
man’s wife needs no paint. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1659 in James Howell’s 
collection of proverbs.
blood is thicker than water  Bonds of 
loyalty and affection between members of 
the same family are much stronger than any 
other relationship: “Blood is thicker than 
water, my dear; and I know no earthly ties 
that can bind people together if those of 
family connection will not do so” (Anthony 
Trollope, Can You Forgive Her?, 1864). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1813, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
much earlier origin. Compare the 12th-
century German saying “sippebluot von was-
sere niht verdirbet [kin-blood is not spoiled 
by water].”
Variant of this proverb: blood is 
thicker than water, but sometimes it runs 
mighty thin.
the blood of the martyrs is the seed of 
the church  The martyrdom of early 
members of the Christian Church helped 
the religion to fl ourish and spread; also 
used more generally to point out that 
persecution and oppression often have the 
opposite effect to that intended: Bearing in 
blessed are they who expect nothing, for they shall not be disappointed
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   30 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
31
mind that the blood of the martyrs is the seed of 
the church, the government has adopted a less 
confrontational approach to the problem of eco-
terrorism. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1560, but with the implication that it was 
of earlier origin. The Christian theologian 
Tertullian (c. a.d. 160–c. 220) wrote, 
“semen est sanguis Christianorum [the blood 
of Christians is seed].”
blood will have blood  One act of 
violence provokes another, by way of 
revenge: Blood will have blood, and the par-
ents of the murdered child swore to hunt down 
and kill the man convicted of the crime if he 
was ever released from prison. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1559, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of bibli-
cal origin: “Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, 
by man shall his blood be shed” (Genesis 
9:6). It occurs in Shakespeare’s play Mac-
beth (3:4): “It will have blood; they say 
blood will have blood.”
blood will tell  Inherited characteris-
tics—whether good or bad—cannot be 
hidden forever: He launched himself into 
the attack with all the fi ghting instincts of 
his military forebears—as they say, blood will 
tell. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1850 in World a Mask by the 
American poet, playwright, and diplomat 
George Henry Boker.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what’s bred in the bone will come 
out in the flesh.
blue are the hills that are far away  Dis-
tant places or things seem more desir-
able than they are in reality; also applied 
to past or future events: When I hear my 
grandparents reminiscing about the carefree 
days of their youth, I am tempted to remind 
them of the saying “Blue are the hills that are 
far away.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in this form in 1902, but with the impli-
cation that it was already in common 
use.
Variant of this proverb: far away the 
hills are green.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: distance lends enchantment to 
the view.
blushing is a sign of grace  A person’s 
blushes may be interpreted as a proof of a 
good, sensitive character: “However, blush-
ing is some sign of grace” (Jonathan Swift, 
A Complete Collection of Polite and Ingenious 
Conversation, 1738). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1595 in A Quest of Enquirie.
Variant of this proverb: blushing is 
virtue’s color.
a book is like a garden carried in the 
pocket  A book can bring as much plea-
sure and contain as much variety as a 
garden, with the advantage that it can be 
carried with you wherever you go: “A book 
is like a garden carried in the pocket,” my uncle 
used to say as he took me to the local bookstore 
to choose my birthday present. The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
books and friends should be few and 
good  It is best to be selective both in 
your choice of reading and of friends: 
Those who ignore the maxim that books and 
friends should be few and good will fi nd they 
have neither the time nor the inclination to 
give proper attention to either. The proverb 
is thought to be of Spanish origin.
the boot is on the other foot  See the 
shoe is on the other foot.
 the boot is on the other foot
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   31 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
32
borrowing brings sorrowing  See he that 
goes a-borrowing, goes a-sorrowing.
both poverty and prosperity come from 
spending money—prosperity from spend-
ing it wisely  Spending money recklessly 
will make you poor, but spending it on 
things that are bound to yield a profi t or 
rise in value will make you rich: The two 
brothers inherited equal shares of their parents’ 
wealth, but one died penniless while the other 
amassed a considerable fortune. When asked 
the secret of his success, he would reply, “Both 
poverty and prosperity come from spending 
money—prosperity from spending it wisely.” 
The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
boys seldom make passes at girls who 
wear glasses  It is popularly believed 
that girls who wear glasses are less attrac-
tive to the opposite sex: She began to 
wonder whether the saying “Boys seldom make 
passes for girls who wear glasses” had been 
invented by the male sex so that their own 
physical shortcomings would not be observed 
too clearly by the nearsighted young women 
they met. The proverb occurs in a verse 
“News Item” by the journalist Dorothy 
Parker (1893–1967), “Men seldom make 
passes/At girls who wear glasses.” It has 
also been associated with the humorist 
Ogden Nash (1902–1971).
boys will be boys  Boys must be forgiven 
for their bad or boisterous behavior; also 
used ironically when grown men behave 
in an irresponsible or childish manner: 
“Aunt Sally was a good deal uneasy; but 
Uncle Silas he said there warn’t no occa-
sion to be—boys will be boys, he said, and 
you’ll see this one turn up in the morning 
all sound and right” (Mark Twain, Huck-
leberry Finn, 1884). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1601 in the form “Youth will 
be youthful.” Other words, such as girls or 
kids, may be used in place of boys.
brave men lived before Agamemnon 
People whose brave or noble exploits are 
not recorded in history or literature tend 
to be forgotten over the course of time: 
“Brave men were living before Agamem-
non/And since, exceeding valorous and 
sage” (Lord Byron, “Don Juan,” 1819). 
The proverb originated in the writings 
of the Roman poet Horace (65–8 b.c.): 
“Many brave men lived before Agamem-
non’s time; but they are all, unmourned 
and unknown, covered by the long night, 
because they lack their sacred poet.”
bread always falls buttered side 
down  In any situation, the least desir-
able of two or more possible outcomes 
is the one that will occur: Bread always 
falls buttered side down, so it seemed inevi-
table that the train would be delayed on the 
one day I had to get to work on time. First 
recorded in the mid-19th century, the 
proverb appears in a rhyme written by 
James Payn (as a parody of a more seri-
ous poem) and published in 1884: “I 
never had a piece of toast/Particularly 
long and wide,/But fell upon the sanded 
fl oor,/And always on the buttered side.” 
The diplomat Henry Kissinger is said 
to have remarked, “If you drop a piece 
of buttered bread on the carpet, the 
chances of its falling with the buttered 
side down are in direct relationship with 
the cost of the carpet.” The proverb—
or the phenomenon it describes—is 
popularly regarded as an illustration 
of Murphy’s Law, “If anything can go 
wrong, it will.”
borrowing brings sorrowing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   32 1/29/07   5:12:20 PM
33
Variant of this proverb: the bread 
always falls on its buttered side.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if anything can go wrong, it will.
bread is the staff of life  Food is essen-
tial for survival: We must at least ensure 
that these people have enough money to buy 
basic food items—bread is the staff of life. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1638 in 
Penkethman, Artachthos.
brevity is the soul of wit  When you tell 
a joke or make a speech, you are most 
likely to please or impress your listeners 
if you keep it as short as possible; used to 
discourage long-windedness or encourage 
conciseness of expression: “Clinton is . . . 
given to garrulousness while brevity, they 
say, is the soul of wit” (Washington Post, 
1996). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Shakespeare’s play Hamlet (2:2), where it 
is used by Polonius, a character known 
for his verbosity. In this early instance the 
word wit means “wisdom,” but in modern 
usage it usually means “humor.” Dorothy 
Parker parodied the proverb when she 
wrote, in a caption for Vogue (1916), 
“Brevity is the soul of lingerie.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
length begets loathing.
a bribe will enter without knocking  The 
use of money enables access where it 
would otherwise be denied: He planned 
to use the money to buy his way into the great 
man’s presence, knowing that he would be 
refused admittance if he came empty-handed 
but also that a bribe will enter without knock-
ing. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1619 by B. Rich in Irish Hubbub: “Honesty 
stands at the gate and knockes, and brib-
ery enters in.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a golden key can open any door.
a bully is always a coward  Bullies only 
pick on those who are weaker than them-
selves and cannot fi ght back—they are 
afraid of everybody else: A bully is always a 
coward, and the girls stopped teasing her when 
they discovered that she was the principal’s 
niece. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in Charles Lamb, Essays of Elia 
(1820–23).
burn not your house to scare away 
the mice  Do not try to solve a minor 
problem by taking action that will cause 
much greater harm: Such a drastic step could 
destroy your whole business, and all because 
of one dissatisfi ed customer—don’t burn your 
house to scare away the mice. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
1615 in T. Adams, England’s Sickness.
Variant of this proverb: burn not 
your house to fright the mouse away.
a burnt child dreads the fi re  Somebody 
who has had an unpleasant experience 
thereafter shrinks from the cause of that 
experience: “In his savage taunting, he 
fl ared the candle so close at me, that I 
turned my face aside, to save it from 
the fl ame. ‘Ah!’ he cried, laughing, after 
doing it again, ‘the burnt child dreads the 
fi re!’” (Charles Dickens, Great Expecta-
tions, 1860–61). First recorded c. 1250 
with slightly different wording, the prov-
erb was used in its current form in John 
Lyly’s Euphues and His England (1580).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: once bitten, twice shy.
the busiest men have the most leisure 
People who are industrious by nature 
 the busiest men have the most leisure
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   33 1/29/07   5:12:21 PM
34
always seem to have the most spare time, 
either because they accomplish their work 
more quickly and effi ciently or because 
they cram so much into their busy lives: 
“The busiest men have always the most lei-
sure; and while discharging the multifari-
ous duties of a parish priest and a guardian 
he found time for travelling” (London Times 
Literary Supplement, 1911). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1884, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if you want something done, ask 
a busy person; idle people have the 
least leisure.
business before pleasure  It is best to 
get work or business matters out of the 
way before turning your attention to 
more pleasurable things: “Much as I adore 
your company, there is still business to 
attend to . . . and . . . business must come 
before pleasure” (James Jones, From Here 
to Eternity, 1951). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1767, in the form “Pleasure 
should always give way to business,” in 
Thomas Hutchinson’s Diary and Letters.
Variant of this proverb: pleasure fi rst 
and business after.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
work before play.
business is business  There is no room 
for sentiment in business: “Business is 
business, my dear young sir” (William 
Thackeray, The Virginians, 1857). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1797 by 
George Colman in The Heir at Law.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never mix business and pleasure.
business is like a car, it will not run by 
itself except downhill  You must take 
an active part in the day-to-day running 
of your business, or employ a competent 
person to do this for you, if you want it 
to be a success: He had only himself to blame 
for the failure of his company. Having used 
his inheritance to set it up, he then turned 
his attention to other things, forgetting the 
adage that business is like a car—it will not 
run by itself except downhill. The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
business neglected is business lost  In 
the world of commerce, you cannot afford 
to neglect any opportunity to do business: 
I have had a number of inquiries from potential 
customers, which must be followed up as soon as 
possible—business neglected is business lost.
the business of America is business 
Commercial activity is essential for Amer-
ica—or any other nation—to thrive and 
develop: The business of America is business, 
and even small companies such as these have an 
important place in our society. The proverb 
originated in a speech made in 1925 by 
President Calvin Coolidge: “After all, the 
chief business of the American people is 
business.”
busy folks are always meddling  It is in 
the nature of busy people to interfere in 
the affairs of others: Her tireless efforts to 
improve the morality of her neighbors led to 
dark mutterings to the effect that “busy folks 
are always meddling.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1721 by James Kelly in 
A Complete Collection of Scotish Proverbs.
the buyer needs a thousand eyes, the 
seller wants but one  A buyer must 
exercise great caution, and examine the 
goods thoroughly, to avoid being exploited 
business before pleasure
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   34 1/29/07   5:12:21 PM
35
by an unscrupulous seller: Tourists looking 
for bargains in the local markets would do well 
to remember the proverb “The buyer needs a 
thousand eyes, the seller wants but one.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1640 in 
George Herbert’s Outlandish Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: the buyer 
has need of a hundred eyes, the seller of 
but one.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let the buyer beware.
buy in the cheapest market and sell in 
the dearest  The golden rule of com-
merce is to buy a commodity for as 
little as possible and sell it for as much 
as possible: “‘To buy in the cheapest 
market and sell in the dearest’ was Mr. 
Badman’s common rule in business. 
. . . In Bunyan’s opinion it was knav-
ery in disguise” (J. A. Froude, Bunyan, 
1880). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Thomas Lodge’s A Fig for Momus (1595): 
“Buy cheape, sell deare.”
by learning to obey, you will know how 
to command  See he that cannot obey 
cannot command.
 by learning to obey, you will know how to command
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   35 1/29/07   5:12:21 PM
ååå   å
36
Caesar’s wife must be above suspicion 
Those in positions of importance—and 
their associates—must lead blameless 
lives and have spotless reputations: The 
president surrounded himself with aides and 
advisers of irreproachable character, know-
ing that Caesar’s wife must be above suspi-
cion. Julius Caesar is said to have made 
this remark when asked why he had 
divorced his wife (who was suspected 
of having been indirectly involved in a 
scandal).
calamity is the touchstone of a brave 
mind  It is at times of crisis that you fi nd 
out who the truly strong, courageous, or 
great people are: When the fi re broke out she 
immediately took charge of the situation, glad of 
a chance to prove her worth at last—calamity 
is the touchstone of a brave mind. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in 1602: “Calamity gives man a steddy 
heart” (John Marston, Antonio’s Revenge).
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: when the going gets tough, the 
tough get going.
call a man a thief and he will steal  Give 
a person a bad reputation and he or she 
may start to justify it. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1838 by Thomas Carlyle 
in Sartor Resartus: “In a very plain sense 
the proverb says, Call one a thief, and he 
will steal.”
call a spade a spade  Identify things by 
their real names; do not prevaricate about 
awkward truths; say what you mean: He 
was never afraid to call a spade a spade. The 
proverb was recorded in 1519 by William 
Rastell in The Four Elements, though it was 
also quoted by Erasmus.
call no man happy till he dies  However 
happy somebody seems to be, there is 
always the risk that he or she will be struck 
by sorrow or misfortune: “‘Call no man 
happy until he is dead.’ . . . He was sev-
enty-two, and yet there was still time for 
this dream . . . to change to a nightmare” 
(C. S. Forester, Hornblower and the Crisis, 
1967). Of ancient origin, the proverb has 
been attributed to the Athenian statesman 
Solon (c. 638–559 b.c.), who told the 
wealthy King Croesus, “Call no man happy 
before he dies, he is at best but fortunate.” 
Compare Sophocles (c. 496–405 b.c.), 
“Deem no man happy until he passes the 
end of his life without suffering grief.”
Variant of this proverb: call no man 
happy till he is dead.
can’t live with ’em, can’t live without 
’em  Some alternatives are equally 
c
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   36 1/29/07   5:12:21 PM
37
impossible (usually applied to a person’s 
male or female partner): That’s the trouble 
with women, can’t live with ’em, can’t live 
without ’em. The origins of the proverb 
are obscure, though it is thought to be of 
20th-century U.S. coinage.
cards are the devil’s tools  Card 
games—specifi cally those played for 
money—lead to trouble or evil: Hearing 
that a poker game was in progress, she burst 
into the room and knocked over the table where 
the players sat, exclaiming, “Cards are the dev-
il’s tools!” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1676 in Poor Robin’s Almanac in the form 
“Cards and dice . . . are the devil’s books 
and the devil’s bones.”
Variant of this proverb: cards are the 
devil’s books.
care is no cure  Worrying about some-
thing does nothing to put it right. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1590 by 
William Shakespeare in Henry VI Part 1 
(3:3): “Care is no cure, but rather cor-
rosive, for things that are not to be 
remedied.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: care killed the cat; it’s not work 
that kills, but worry.
care killed the cat  Too much wor-
rying can be injurious to your health: 
Relax and enjoy your holiday—care killed 
the cat! The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Shakespeare’s play Much Ado About Nothing 
(5:1), “Though care killed a cat, thou hast 
mettle enough in thee to kill care.” It is 
also used with the word care in the sense 
of “caution” or “loving attention.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: care is no cure; it’s not work 
that kills, but worry.
a cat can look at a king  Even the low-
liest people have the right to look at, or 
show an interest in, those of higher status 
or prestige; often used by somebody 
accused of staring insolently: “‘Don’t be 
impertinent,’ said the King, ‘and don’t 
look at me like that!’ He got behind Alice 
as he spoke. ‘A cat may look at a king,’ said 
Alice. ‘I’ve read that in some book, but I 
don’t remember where’” (Lewis Carroll, 
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, 1865). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in John Hey-
wood’s Dialogue of Proverbs in 1546. The 
French equivalent is “Un chien regarde bien 
un évêque [A dog can look at a bishop].”
Variant of this proverb: a cat may 
look at a king.
catching’s before hanging  Offenders 
can only be punished when or if they are 
caught: We all know what we would like to 
do to the culprit, but fi rst we have to fi nd out 
who it is—catching’s before hanging. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1818 in A. 
N. Royall’s Letters from Alabama.
catch not at the shadow and lose the 
substance  Do not allow yourself to be 
distracted from your main purpose by 
irrelevancies: “Like the dog in the fable, 
to throw away the substance in catching 
at the shadow” (Thomas Love Peacock, 
Nightmare Abbey, 1818). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1578 by John Lyly in 
Euphues: The Anatomy of Wit.
a cat has nine lives  Cats seem to be 
incredibly lucky or skillful at surviving 
or avoiding accidents: They say that a cat 
has nine lives, but if the one next door makes 
a habit of dozing off under my car it could 
fi nd itself using them up rather quickly. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in the 
 a cat has nine lives
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   37 1/29/07   5:12:21 PM
38
form “A woman has nine lives like a cat.” 
In 1894 two writers compared the lives of 
a cat with those of a lie: R. D. Blackmore 
wrote “If a cat has nine lives . . . a lie has 
ninety-nine,” and Mark Twain wrote “One 
of the most striking differences between 
a cat and a lie is that a cat has only nine 
lives.”
a cat in gloves catches no mice  It is 
sometimes necessary to be bold or ruth-
less, or to do unpleasant things, in order 
to achieve one’s ends: “Handle your Tools 
without Mittens; remember that the Cat in 
Gloves catches no Mice” (Benjamin Frank-
lin, Poor Richard’s Almanack, 1758). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in French in the 
14th century and in English in 1573.
a cat may look at a king  See a cat can 
look at a king.
the cat would eat fi sh, but would not wet 
her feet  You must be prepared to put up 
with personal inconvenience, discomfort, 
or risk in order to get what you want; 
often used when somebody is hesitant 
about doing something for this reason: 
Many people deny themselves their dream 
vacations because of a fear of fl ying—the cat 
would eat fi sh, but would not wet her feet. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
c. 1225. It is alluded to in Shakespeare’s 
play Macbeth (1:7), “Wouldst thou . . . live 
a coward in thine own esteem,/Letting ‘I 
dare not’ wait upon ‘I would,’/Like the 
poor cat i’ the adage?”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that would have eggs must endure 
the cackling of hens.
caution is the parent of safety  You 
must proceed with care, and take all 
the necessary precautions, if you want 
to avoid harm or injury: After listening to 
the weather forecast, we decided to postpone 
our sailing trip—caution is the parent of 
safety. This proverb is fi rst recorded in 
Benjamin Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Alma-
nack (1733).
a chain is no stronger than its weakest 
link  A weak part or member will affect 
the success or effectiveness of the whole: 
“To begin with, how can things so inse-
cure as the successful experiences of this 
world afford a stable anchorage? A chain 
is no stronger than its weakest link, and 
life is after all a chain” (William James, 
The Varieties of Religious Experience, 1902). 
The proverb was used in 1856 in a letter 
by Charles Kingsley in the form “nothing 
is stronger than its weakest part.” The fi rst 
recorded occurrence of the current form 
dates from 1868.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the thread breaks where it is 
weakest.
a change is as good as a rest  Doing 
something different for a time can be 
just as refreshing as taking a break from 
work; also used more generally of any 
change in routine: A change is as good 
as a rest, and after a couple of hours spent 
weeding the garden I returned to my desk 
with renewed inspiration. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1890: “One of our 
greatest statesmen has said that a change 
of work is the best rest. So it is” (Sir 
Arthur Conan Doyle, Lippincott’s Monthly 
Magazine).
Variant of this proverb: a change of 
work is a rest.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
variety is the spice of life.
a cat in gloves catches no mice
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   38 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
39
change not a clout till May be out  See 
ne’er cast a clout till may be out.
character is destiny  A person’s charac-
ter determines the way that his or her life 
will develop: “‘Character’—says Novalis, 
in one of his questionable aphorisms—
‘character is destiny.’ But not the whole 
of our destiny” (George Eliot, The Mill 
on the Floss, 1860). In this quotation, and 
elsewhere, the proverb is attributed to the 
German writer Friedrich Leopold von 
Hardenberg (1772–1801), whose pen-
name was Novalis. Others, however, have 
traced it back to the Greek philosopher 
Heraclitus (fi fth century b.c.).
charity begins at home  You should look 
after those nearest and dearest to you 
before you turn your attention to others 
further afi eld: “And hard it is upon the part 
of the law that it should be so confound-
edly down upon us unfortunate victims; 
when it takes such amazing good interest 
for itself from all its clients. But charity 
begins at home, and justice begins next 
door” (Charles Dickens, Martin Chuzzlewit, 
1843–44). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in this form in Beaumont and Fletcher’s 
play Wit Without Money (c. 1625), but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin: 
in the late 14th century John Wycliffe 
wrote, “Charity should begin at himself.”
Variant of this proverb: charity 
begins at home but should not end there.
charity covers a multitude of sins  A 
kind and loving person is prepared to 
forgive a great deal of wrongdoing; also 
used to imply that acts of charity may be 
used to cover up sinful behavior or ease a 
guilty conscience: “A cloak (on a woman’s 
back) is an emblem of charity—it cov-
ers a multitude of sins” (Wilkie Collins, 
The Moonstone, 1868). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “And above all things have 
fervent charity among yourselves: for 
charity shall cover the multitude of sins” 
(1 Peter 4:8). Other words may be used 
in place of charity: Louisa May Alcott 
wrote “beauty always covers a multitude 
of sins in a man’s eyes.”
charity is not a bone you throw to a dog 
but a bone you share with a dog  There 
should be more to charity than simply giv-
ing money or other material goods—it is 
better to establish a relationship with those 
in need and to work with them for the 
benefi t of all concerned: She spends much of 
her spare time working with the homeless, fi rmly 
believing that charity is not a bone you throw to 
a dog but a bone you share with a dog.
cheaters never prosper  Those who 
cheat—whether at school, at sports and 
games, or in business—may be initially 
successful but will ultimately suffer for 
their wrongdoing: He set out to disprove the 
saying “Cheaters never prosper,” and made a for-
tune selling fake works of art, but lost everything 
when his deception was discovered. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1805, in R. Parkin-
son, Tour in America in the form “Cheating 
never thrives,” but with the implication 
that it was already in general use.
Variants of this proverb: cheats never 
prosper; cheaters never win and winners 
never cheat.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
honesty is the best policy; honesty 
pays.
cheerful company shortens the 
miles  See good company on the road 
is the shortest cut.
 cheerful company shortens the miles
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   39 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
40
cheese digests all things but itself  Eat-
ing cheese at the end of a meal helps 
to digest what has gone before, but 
the cheese itself may prove to be indi-
gestible: I couldn’t resist helping myself 
to another slice of cheese, though I knew 
I would regret it later—cheese digests all 
things but itself. Of Latin origin, the 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
the 16th century: “Cheese . . . digesteth 
all things except itselfe” (John Lyly, Sap-
pho & Phao).
chickens always come home to 
roost  See curses, like chickens, come 
home to roost.
the child is father of the man  A child’s 
character is an indication of the type of 
adult he or she will become—human 
nature does not change from youth to 
maturity: “The lady who is my opponent 
is very persuasive, but what of her past? 
. . . They say the child is the father of 
the man” (Howard Fast, The Immigrant’s 
Daughter, 1985). The proverb originated 
in this form in William Wordsworth’s 
poem “My Heart Leaps Up” (1807), but 
it echoes a sentiment expressed by John 
Milton in Paradise Regained (1671): “The 
childhood shews the man.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
give me a child for the first seven years 
and he is mine for life.
a child on a giant’s shoulders sees fur-
ther of the two  See a dwarf on a 
giant’s shoulders sees further of the 
two.
children, fools, and drunkards tell the 
truth  See children and fools speak 
the truth.
children and fools speak the truth 
Children and foolish people have a ten-
dency to say what is true, because they 
have not learned that it may be advanta-
geous or diplomatic to do otherwise: 
Children and fools tell the truth, and Mat-
thew learned the hard way that it is sometimes 
expedient to lie. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, in Letters & Papers of Reign of 
Henry VIII (1537), but with the implica-
tion that it was of much earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: children, 
fools, and drunkards tell the truth.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
out of the mouths of babes and suck-
lings come great truths.
children are certain cares, but uncertain 
comforts  Children are bound to cause 
their parents anxiety, and may or may not 
also bring them joy: Those contemplating 
parenthood should bear in mind the saying 
“Children are certain cares, but uncertain 
comforts”—the pleasure I gain from having my 
kids around me is obliterated by the horrors I 
imagine when they don’t come home on time. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 in 
John Clarke, Parœmiologia Anglo-Latina.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: happy is he that is happy in his 
children.
children should be seen and not 
heard  In the company of adults, chil-
dren should not speak until they are spo-
ken to: “When he asks questions I can’t 
answer I’ll just tell him children should 
be seen and not heard” (Lucy Maud 
Montgomery, Anne of Avonlea, 1909). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1400 in the 
form “A maid [young woman] should be 
seen but not heard.” It was applied to chil-
dren from the early 19th century onward, 
cheese digests all things but itself
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   40 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
41
but it is now considered to be a rather 
old-fashioned notion.
the child that is born on the Sabbath 
day is bonny and blithe and good and 
gay  Children born on a Sunday are sup-
posed to be happy, healthy, good-looking, 
and well-behaved: I can’t believe that such a 
miserable, sickly little boy could have been born 
on a Sunday—I thought that children born 
on the Sabbath day were supposed to be “bonny 
and blithe and good and gay.” The proverb is 
the last line of a traditional rhyme begin-
ning “Monday’s child is fair of face.” See 
CHINESE PROVERBS
The Chinese have hundreds of proverbs on which to draw for advice in their everyday lives. 
Western tradition often attributes such sayings to the Chinese philosopher Confucius, though 
in reality most are of unknown authorship.
All things seem diffi cult at fi rst
Almond nuts come to those who have no teeth
Always leave a little room for a mistake
Before you prepare to improve the world, look around your own house three times
Do not climb a tree to catch a fi sh
Do not remove a fl y from your friend’s forehead with a hatchet
Drunkards talk to the gods
Every book must be chewed to get out its juice
The fi rst time you cheat me, be ashamed. The second time it is I who must be 
ashamed
He who is not friendly towards a good guest will never have one
He who rides a tiger can never get off
If no one comes, the dog does not bark
If you are not a fi sh, how can you know if the fi sh are happy?
If you don’t climb the mountain, you can’t view the plain
If you wish to succeed, consult three old people
It is better to light a candle than to curse the darkness
A journey of a thousand miles must begin with a single step
Love your neighbors but don’t pull down the fence
One bamboo does not make a forest
One joy scatters a hundred griefs
Only one who can swallow an insult is a man
Pain is easier to endure than an itch
A picture is worth ten thousand words
Procrastination is the thief of time
Rivalry between scholars improves science
A thousand workers, a thousand plans
A tiger cannot beat a crowd of monkeys
A wise man will not rebuke a fool
åååååthe child that is born on the Sabbath day is bonny and blithe and good and gay
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   41 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
42
entries at the days of the week for other 
proverbs from this rhyme.
choose neither a woman nor linen by 
candlelight  See never choose your 
women or linen by candlelight.
choose the lesser of two evils  If you are 
forced to choose between two options, 
both of which are undesirable, all you can 
do is choose the one that is less undesir-
able than the other: Choose the lesser of two 
evils—if you tell her the truth she’ll be upset, 
but if she fi nds out later that you lied to her 
you could lose a friend for life. The proverb 
occurs in the writings of Aristotle and 
Cicero, and was fi rst recorded in Eng-
lish in Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde (c. 
1385). The U.S. actress Mae West paro-
died the proverb when she said, “Between 
two evils, I always pick the one I never 
tried before,” in the movie Klondike Annie 
(1936).
Variant of this proverb: of two evils 
choose the less.
Christmas comes but once a year  Ex-
travagance and self-indulgence at 
Christmas—or any other annual celebra-
tion—can be justifi ed by the fact that it is 
a relatively infrequent occurrence: All over 
the country, people will be eating and drink-
ing to excess, telling themselves that Christmas 
comes but once a year. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1557 in Thomas Tusser, A 
Hundreth good pointes of husbandrie.
the church is an anvil that has worn out 
many hammers  The Christian Church 
has proved strong enough in the past to 
resist criticism, attack, and persecution, 
and will continue to do so in the future: 
“The Church is an anvil which has worn 
out many hammers and the story of the 
fi rst collision is, in essentials, the story of 
all” (Alexander MacLaren, The Acts of the 
Apostles, 1908). The proverb is attributed 
to the theologian Theodore Beza, who 
made this remark in response to a mas-
sacre of Huguenots in 1562.
a church is God between four walls  A 
church is more than just a building—its 
inner space is fi lled with the divine pres-
ence: If a church is God between four walls, then 
this building, with its atmosphere of spirituality 
and devotion, must once have been a place of 
worship. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1948 in a U.S. proverb collection.
circumstances alter cases  The same 
general principle cannot be applied to 
every individual case, and what is right, 
good, or appropriate in one set of cir-
cumstances may be wrong in another: 
“On a table of immense size lay the bud-
get, piles of the Chamber records, open 
volumes of the ‘Moniteur,’ with passages 
carefully marked, to throw at the head of 
a Minister his forgotten words and force 
him to recant them, under the jeering 
plaudits of a foolish crowd incapable of 
perceiving how circumstances alter cases” 
(Honoré de Balzac, The Rise and Fall of 
César Birotteau, 1837). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1678.
civility costs nothing  You have nothing 
to lose by being polite: “‘You wretch’ (she 
says), ‘how did you come by this?’ I made 
her a low bow. I said, ‘Civility costs noth-
ing, ma’am; and sometimes buys a great 
deal’ ” (Wilkie Collins, Jezebel’s Daughter, 
1880). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1706 in J. Stevens’ A New Spanish and 
En glish Dictionary in the form “Civility is 
choose neither a woman nor linen by candlelight
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   42 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
43
worth much and costs little,” echoing the 
sentiment expressed in a French proverb 
of the late 15th century.
Variants of this proverb: courtesy 
costs nothing; politeness costs nothing 
and gains everything.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s nothing lost by civility.
a civil question deserves a civil 
answer  If somebody asks you some-
thing politely, you should respond in the 
same manner: I was tempted to tell her to 
mind her own business, but a civil question 
deserves a civil answer and I replied as politely 
as I could. The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
in its variant form, in 1853.
Variant of this proverb: give a civil 
answer to a civil question.
cleanliness is next to godliness  Per-
sonal hygiene indicates a pious or virtu-
ous nature; also used more generally to 
emphasize the importance of cleanness: 
Having been brought up to believe that clean-
liness is next to godliness, she was seriously 
concerned for the spiritual well-being of her 
roommate, who bathed only once a week. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in a sermon given by John Wesley 
in 1788, but the sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient Egyptian or Hebrew origin. 
In The Advancement of Learning (1605), 
Francis Bacon wrote, “Cleanness of body 
was ever esteemed to proceed from a due 
reverence to God.”
Variant of this proverb: cleanliness is 
akin to godliness.
a clear conscience can bear any trouble 
People who have done no wrong fi nd it 
easier to face the demands of the world 
than those who have guilty consciences: 
A clear conscience can bear any trouble, but 
there are limits even for the most guiltless. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1732 by 
Thomas Fuller in Gnomologia.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
do right and fear no man.
clergymen’s sons always turn out badly 
It might be expected that the children of 
ministers of religion should lead exem-
plary lives in adulthood, but the opposite 
is often the case—perhaps as a reaction 
against their early upbringing: “An Eton 
boy . . . when asked why the sons of Eli 
turned out badly, replied ‘The sons of 
clergymen always turn out badly’” (W. R. 
Inge, Outspoken Essays, 1922). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1885.
Variant of this proverb: a preacher’s 
son is often bad.
the clock goes as it pleases the clerk  It 
is up to civil servants and other bureau-
crats how time is governed and spent: 
They were kept waiting in reception for two 
hours, but the clock goes as it pleases the clerk, 
as they say. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1678 by John Ray in A Collection of 
English Proverbs.
a closed mouth catches no fl ies  See a 
shut mouth catches no flies.
the closer to the bone, the sweeter the 
meat  See the nearer the bone, the 
sweeter the flesh.
close sits my shirt, but closer my 
skin  See near is my shirt, but nearer 
is my skin.
clothes don’t make the man  You should 
not judge a person by the way he or she 
 clothes don’t make the man
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   43 1/29/07   5:12:22 PM
44
is dressed: He was such a smartly dressed, 
well-groomed young man that I trusted him 
instantly—unlike some of the scruffy indi-
viduals who knock at our door offering their 
services. However, I was wrong—he cheated us 
out of all our savings, which just goes to prove 
that clothes don’t make the man.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a var-
let, though they be clad in silk or 
scarlet.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: clothes make the man; fine feath-
ers make fine birds.
clothes make the man  The style or 
quality of people’s clothing is often an 
indicator of their character, and also has a 
tendency to affect both the way that others 
judge them and the way that they behave: 
“It is truly miserable to behold how our 
youth even now is subjected to a fashion 
madness which helps to reverse the sense 
of the old saying: ‘Clothes make the man’ 
into something truly catastrophic” (Adolf 
Hitler, Mein Kampf, 1925). First recorded 
in English c. 1400, the proverb is of 
ancient origin and is echoed in other lan-
guages. The sentiment it expresses occurs 
frequently in literature, notably in Shake-
speare’s play Hamlet (1:3): “the apparel oft 
proclaims the man.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: fine feathers make fine birds; the 
tailor makes the man.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, 
though they be clad in silk or scar-
let; clothes don’t make the man.
the cobbler’s children go barefoot  See 
the shoemaker’s child always goes 
barefoot.
the cobbler should stick to his last  See 
let the cobbler stick to his last.
the cobbler to his last and the gunner to 
his linstock  See let the cobbler stick 
to his last.
a cock is mighty in his own back-
yard  See every cock will crow upon 
his own dunghill.
cold hands, warm heart  According to 
traditional belief, people whose hands feel 
cold to the touch are kind and affectionate 
by nature: He touched my cheek with his hand 
and I was reassured to feel the coolness of his 
fi ngers, despite the heat of the night—“cold 
hands, warm heart,” as my mother always says. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1903 in 
V.S. Lean, Collectanea.
come live with me and you’ll know me 
Nobody truly knows another person until 
they have spent some time living together: 
“Come live with me and you’ll know me,” they 
say, and how right they are! Sharing an apart-
ment with my friend for six months showed me 
what a selfi sh, moody person she really is, and 
now I understand why her parents threw her 
out of their house. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1925 in Sean O’Casey’s Juno 
and the Paycock, but is probably of much 
earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you never know a man until you live 
with him.
coming events cast their shadows 
before  Future events, especially those 
of some signifi cance, can often be pre-
dicted from the warning signs that pre-
cede them: “Everything in the world is in 
agitation. The signs of the times are omi-
clothes make the man
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   44 1/29/07   5:12:23 PM
45
nous. Coming events cast their shadows 
before. The Spirit of God is withdrawing 
from the earth, and calamity follows 
calamity by sea and by land” (Ellen G. 
White, The Desire of Ages, 1898). The 
proverb originated in this form in Thomas 
Campbell’s poem “Lochiel’s Warning” 
(1803), but the sentiment it expresses is 
of ancient origin.
a common danger causes common 
action  People are more willing to work 
together to avert danger when they all 
feel similarly threatened: We had little sup-
port for our campaign against the new legisla-
tion until it was discovered that every employee 
in the state would be adversely affected—a 
common danger causes common action. The 
proverb is recorded as a regional expres-
sion in the United States.
common fame is seldom to blame  Ru-
mors are rarely without substance, and 
if unpleasant things are being said about 
somebody, then that person has probably 
done something to deserve them: Common 
fame is seldom to blame, and nobody gets a 
reputation for lying if he or she has always told 
the truth. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1639 in J. Clarke, Parœmiologia Anglo-
Latina.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: there’s no smoke without fire; 
what everybody says must be true.
the company makes the feast  You will 
enjoy a meal or celebration far more if 
you are among cheerful friendly people, 
and the quality of the food and drink—or 
of the surroundings—is of lesser impor-
tance: As impoverished students we couldn’t 
afford to eat out anywhere better than the local 
burger bar, but I enjoyed those get-togethers far 
more than the business lunches I now have at 
the most expensive restaurant in town—the 
company makes the feast. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1653, in Izaak Walton’s 
The Compleat Angler.
comparisons are odious  People and 
things should be judged on the individual 
qualities they possess, rather than by com-
paring one with another: “Comparisons 
are odious; but I think that by the side of 
German English generally has the advan-
tage in expressiveness” (W. R. Inge, More 
Lay Thoughts, 1931). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English c. 1440, but a similar 
French proverb, translated as “Comparisons 
are hateful,” dates from a hundred years 
earlier. The malapropism “Comparisons are 
odorous” comes from Shakespeare’s play 
Much Ado about Nothing (3:5).
confess and be hanged  There is little 
incentive for confession when punish-
ment is the inevitable result; used as justi-
fi cation for not owning up to wrongdoing: 
“It is so easy, and apparently so natural, 
to deny what you cannot be easily con-
victed of, that a savage as well as a child 
lies to excuse himself, almost as instinc-
tively as he raises his hand to protect 
his head. The old saying, ‘confess and be 
hanged,’ carries much argument in it” (Sir 
Walter Scott, Chronicles of the Canongate, 
1827). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1589 in “Misophonus,” De Caede Gallorum 
Regis, but with the implication that it was 
already in general use.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: confession is good for the soul.
confession is good for the soul  Own-
ing up to wrongdoing will ease your 
conscience and make you feel better: 
 confession is good for the soul
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   45 1/29/07   5:12:23 PM
46
They say that confession is good for the soul, 
but I was reluctant to put my job on the line 
by admitting to such an egregious mistake. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1641 in 
David Fergusson’s Scottish Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: open confes-
sion is good for the soul. 
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: confess and be hanged.
conscience does make cowards of us 
all  People troubled by their conscience 
often reveal their guilt by acting in an 
uncharacteristically fearful manner: Her 
reluctance to testify in court made me suspi-
cious. Conscience does make cowards of us 
all, and I began to wonder if the whole 
story was just a fi gment of her imagination. 
The proverb originated in this form in 
Shakespeare’s play Hamlet (3:1), and is 
sometimes still used in a way that is closer 
to the original meaning, namely, that 
people often use scruples of conscience as 
an excuse for not taking bold action that 
may have unpleasant results.
Variant of this proverb: conscience 
makes cowards of us all.
conscience gets a lot of credit that 
belongs to cold feet  Something com-
mended as an act of conscience may be 
simply due to cowardice or loss of nerve: 
Everybody thought the governor had decided to 
keep the school open because it was the right 
thing to do, but it seems he was just afraid of 
the political backlash if he closed it—con-
science gets a lot of credit that belongs to cold 
feet. The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
conscience makes cowards of us all  See 
conscience does make cowards of us 
all.
consistency is the hobgoblin of little 
minds  See a foolish consistency is 
the hobgoblin of little minds.
constant dropping wears away a 
stone  It is often possible to achieve a 
major purpose—for example, persuad-
ing people or breaking down their resis-
tance—by a series of small but persistent 
actions or remarks: “. . . notwithstanding 
the proverb that constant dropping will 
wear away a stone, you may set your mind 
at rest that these people never will—never 
would, in a hundred years—impair your 
ground with Miss Havisham, in any par-
ticular, great or small” (Charles Dickens, 
Great Expectations, 1860–61). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in the 13th century, 
with different wording, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin. Compare 
Tibullus (c. 48–19 b.c.), “longa dies molli 
saxa peredit aqua [length of time eats away 
stones with soft water].”
Variant of this proverb: constant 
dripping wears away a stone.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
little strokes fell great oaks.
a constant guest is never welcome  Visi-
tors who turn up too frequently will fi nd 
they are no longer welcome: They appeared 
to have forgotten the old warning that a con-
stant guest is never welcome. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1732 by Thomas 
Fuller in Gnomologia.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: fish and guests stink after three 
days; short visits make long friends.
a contented mind is a continual 
feast  Those who are satisfi ed with their 
lot in life are far happier than those who 
are constantly striving for something bet-
conscience does make cowards of us all
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   46 1/29/07   5:12:23 PM
47
ter: “‘. . . although I take fi fty pounds a 
year here after taking above two hundred 
elsewhere, I prefer it to running the risk of 
having my old domestic experiences raked 
up against me, as I should do if I tried to 
make a move.’ ‘Right you are. A contented 
mind is a continual feast’” (Thomas Hardy, 
Jude the Obscure, 1895). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1535 in the form “A quiet 
heart is a continual feast” (Miles Cover-
dale, Bible Proverbs [15:15]).
Variant of this proverb: a contented 
mind is a perpetual feast.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
content is more than a kingdom.
content is more than a kingdom  Con-
tentment is more valuable than material 
riches: To those who face a friendless and 
lonely death content must surely be worth 
more than a kingdom. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1591 in the works of Robert 
Greene.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: a contented mind is a continual 
feast.
corporations have neither bodies to be 
punished nor souls to be damned  Large 
or ganizations are accountable to nobody—
unlike individual people, who can be made 
to suffer physically or mentally for their 
unjust or immoral behavior: The company 
acted unethically, but stayed within the law, so 
there was nothing that anybody could do about 
it—corporations have neither bodies to be 
punished nor souls to be damned. The proverb 
is attributed to Lord Chancellor Thurlow, 
who is said to have made this or a similar 
remark c. 1775—a variant of the original 
quotation is “Did you ever expect a cor-
poration to have a conscience, when it has 
no soul to be damned, and no body to be 
kicked.” This sentiment was, however fi rst 
expressed c. 1580 or earlier.
corruption will fi nd a dozen alibis for its 
evil deeds  Those who are guilty of cor-
ruption are so lacking in integrity that they 
will not hesitate to make excuses for or lie 
about what they have done: We knew that 
the offi cials had been accepting bribes, but we 
could not impeach them without more concrete 
evidence—corruption will fi nd a dozen alibis 
for its evil deeds. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
councils of war never fi ght  When a 
number of people get together to discuss 
something important, they rarely decide 
on a drastic course of action: As soon as I 
heard that a committee had been set up to dis-
cuss the issue, I knew I could rest assured that 
no action would be taken—it’s well known 
that councils of war never fi ght. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1863, in H. W. Hal-
leck, Telegram, but with the implication 
that it was already in general use.
courage is fear that has said its 
prayers  A brave person is not necessar-
ily fearless, but has drawn strength from 
religion or some other source: I admired 
her bravery in facing up to the bullies. “I’m 
not really brave,” she replied, “courage is simply 
fear that has said its prayers.” The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
the course of true love never did run 
smooth  Even the most loving relation-
ship has its ups and downs; usually said 
when lovers have a minor quarrel or face 
a temporary obstacle to their happiness: 
“Ralph’s letter was a long, involved . . . 
document, beginning with another string 
 the course of true love never did run smooth
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   47 1/29/07   5:12:23 PM
48
of apologies, repeating most of what he 
had said, and going over all their past. 
Quite a valuable essay on the theme of 
the course of true love never did run 
smooth, Etta thought sardonically” (Rich-
ard Aldington, Women Must Work, 1934). 
The proverb comes from Shakespeare’s 
play A Midsummer Night’s Dream (1:1).
Variant of this proverb: the path of 
true love never runs smooth.
courtesy costs nothing  See civility 
costs nothing.
courtesy is contagious  If you are polite 
to other people, then they will be polite 
to you: Courtesy is contagious, and if you start 
treating your staff with a bit more respect you 
may be pleasantly surprised by the results. The 
proverb is recorded as a regional expres-
sion in the United States.
cowards die many times before their 
death  Cowards who repeatedly fear for 
their lives are constantly suffering an 
experience similar to death itself; also 
used fi guratively of the ignominy of cow-
ardly behavior: His courage failed him when 
he saw the size of the boat—cowards die many 
times before their death, but he found that 
prospect infi nitely preferable to the possible 
consequences of setting sail on the ocean in 
such a frail craft. The proverb comes from 
Shakespeare’s play Julius Caesar (2:2), 
“Cowards die many times before their 
deaths;/The valiant never taste of death 
but once.”
Variant of this proverb: the coward 
dies a thousand deaths, the brave but 
one.
the cow knows not the value of her tail 
till she has lost it  People often fail to 
appreciate the value of their attributes or 
possessions until they have them no more; 
also used when the kindness of friends is 
spurned or taken for granted: You may live 
to regret responding so ungraciously to their 
offers of help—the cow knows not the value 
of her tail till she has lost it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, in Randle Cotgrave, A 
Dictionary of the French and English Tongues 
with different wording, in the early 17th 
century.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
blessings brighten as they take their 
flight; you never miss the water till 
the well runs dry.
the cowl does not make the monk  Do 
not judge a person’s character by his 
or her outward appearance or behavior: 
“Such impostures are sure of support from 
the sort of people . . . who think that it is 
the cowl that makes the monk” (George 
Bernard Shaw, Music in London, 1932). Of 
medieval Latin origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in Thomas Usk’s 
Testament of Love (1387), in the form “For 
habit maketh no monk; ne weringe of 
gilte spurres maketh no knight.”
Variant of this proverb: the habit 
does not make the monk.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t judge a book by its cover; 
judge not according to appearances.
a creaking door hangs longest  Those 
who have many minor ailments and infi r-
mities often outlive those who don’t: Fac-
ing the prospect of yet another operation—this 
time to replace an arthritic knee—she con-
soled herself with the saying that a creaking 
door hangs longest. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1776 in T. Cogan, John Buncle, 
Junior.
courtesy costs nothing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   48 1/29/07   5:12:23 PM
49
Variants of this proverb: a creaking 
door never falls from its hinges; a creaking 
gate hangs longest.
cream always comes to the top  People 
of great worth or quality will ultimately 
enjoy high achievement or public recog-
nition: “Never mind the cream: it will 
always rise to the top. It’s the skim milk 
that needs good teachers” (Bel Kaufman, 
Up the Down Staircase, 1964). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1841, in an essay by 
Ralph Waldo Emerson.
Variant of this proverb: cream always 
rises to the top.
crime doesn’t pay  Criminal activity 
may seem to be profi table, at least in the 
short term, but it ultimately leads to far 
greater loss—of liberty, or even of life; 
used as a deterrent slogan: It’s hard to 
believe that crime doesn’t pay when you read of 
the luxurious lives some of these criminals lead 
in exile. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
the early 20th century. The proverb’s fi rst 
citation is 1927 in N. Martin’s Mosaic. The 
expression was a slogan of the FBI and the 
cartoon detective Dick Tracy.
crime must be concealed by crime  One 
crime often leads to another, committed 
to avoid detection of the fi rst: Crime must 
be concealed by crime, and after embezzling the 
funds he had to construct an elaborate network 
of lies to explain where the money had gone. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1948 in 
a U.S. proverb collection.
criticism is something you can avoid 
by saying nothing, doing nothing, and 
being nothing  Whatever you say or do, 
somebody is bound to criticize you for it: 
If you want to achieve anything in life, you 
must learn how to handle criticism, because it 
is virtually impossible to avoid it—criticism is 
something you can avoid only by saying noth-
ing, doing nothing, and being nothing. The 
proverb is recorded as a regional expres-
sion in the United States.
crosses are ladders that lead to heaven 
Suffering and misfortune often bring out 
the best in a person’s character: “If there 
be real worth in the character . . . it 
will give forth its fi nest fragrance when 
pressed. ‘Crosses’ says the old proverb, 
‘are ladders that lead to heaven’” (Samuel 
Smiles, Self-Help, 1859). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1616, in Thomas Draxe’s 
Adages.
cross the stream where it is shallowest 
Always take the easiest possible approach 
to doing something: Why do you have to 
make things so diffi cult for yourself? “Cross 
the stream where it is shallowest,” as my 
mother used to say. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1603, but with the implica-
tion that it was already in regional use 
in England.
a crow doesn’t pick out the eye of 
another crow  See hawks will not pick 
out hawks’ eyes.
the cure may be worse than the disease 
See the remedy may be worse than the 
disease.
curiosity killed the cat  Inquisitive-
ness—or a desire to fi nd out about some-
thing—can lead you into trouble; usually 
said in response to an importunate ques-
tion: “The townspeople had learned the 
hard way that curiosity killed the cat—
you stayed indoors if there was trouble” 
 curiosity killed the cat
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   49 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
50
(Timothy Mo, The Redundancy of Courage, 
1991). The proverb seems to be of com-
paratively recent origin, having been fi rst 
recorded in 1909 in Henry, Schools and 
Schools.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
ask me no questions and i’ll tell you 
no lies.
curses, like chickens, come home to 
roost  Wrongdoers ultimately have to 
suffer the consequences of their bad deeds; 
also used when those who have wished 
evil on others are struck by misfortune 
themselves: “Their injustice will return 
upon them. Curses, like chickens, come 
home to roost” (Samuel Smiles, Duty, 
1880). The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in Chaucer’s Can-
terbury Tales (c. 1390). In the play The 
Tragedy of Mr Arden of Feversham (1592), of 
unknown authorship, a different simile is 
used: curses are compared to “arrowes 
shot upright,” which come back down on 
the shooter’s head.
Variant of this proverb: chickens 
always come home to roost.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what goes around, comes around.
the customer is always right  In order 
to maintain goodwill in business, you 
should always do what your customers 
want and give them the benefi t of the 
doubt in any dispute: The company gained 
its position as market leader by observing the 
principle that the customer is always right. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in 1917 as a translation of the French 
proverb “Le patron n’a jamais tort [The cus-
tomer is never wrong].” It has been attrib-
uted to various businessmen, including 
César Ritz (1850–1918) and H. Gordon 
Selfridge (1864–1947).
cut your coat according to your 
cloth  Match your actions to your 
resources, and do not try to live beyond 
your means; also used as in the following 
quotation: “We must cut our coat accord-
ing to our cloth and adapt ourselves to 
changing circumstances” (W. R. Inge, Lay 
Thoughts of a Dean, 1926). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1546.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
everybody stretches his legs accord-
ing to the length of his coverlet; 
stretch your arm no further than 
your sleeve will reach.
curses, like chickens, come home to roost
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   50 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
ååå   å
51
the danger past and God forgotten  Peo-
ple are prone to calling on God in times 
of trouble, only to forget all about their 
newly found religious faith as soon as the 
crisis is past: “The danger past, both are 
alike requited;/God is forgotten, and 
the soldier slighted” (T. Jordan, Epigram, 
1685). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1611 by Randle Cotgrave in A Dictionary 
of the French and English Tongues.
Variant of this proverb: the danger 
past God is forgotten; the river past and 
God forgotten.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
man’s extremity is god’s opportunity.
the darkest cloud has a silver lining  See 
every cloud has a silver lining.
the darkest hour is just before 
dawn  Things are often at their worst 
just before they begin to improve: When 
my fellow-campaigners began to lose heart, 
I reminded them of the proverb, “The darkest 
hour is just before dawn,” confi dent that victory 
was now within our grasp. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1650 in Thomas Fuller’s 
Pisgah Sight.
Variant of this proverb: it’s always 
darkest before dawn.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: after a storm comes a calm; when 
things are at the worst they begin to 
mend.
the day is short and the work is long  Life 
is short and there is little time in which to 
get work done: We must apply ourselves to 
our labour, for the day is short and the work 
is long. The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 
1400 in Beryn.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
art is long and life is short.
a dead dog tells no tales  See dead men 
tell no tales.
dead men don’t bite  A dead person can 
no longer do others any harm; often used 
to justify murder: “Then, with a pistol 
in either hand, I addressed him. ‘One 
more step, Mr. Hands,’ said I, ‘and I’ll 
blow your brains out! Dead men don’t 
bite, you know,’ I added with a chuckle” 
(Robert Louis Stevenson, Treasure Island, 
1883). The proverb is of ancient origin: 
according to Plutarch, the Egyptians were 
advised to kill Pompey for this reason in 
48 b.c. It was fi rst recorded in English c. 
1547 in the form “A dead man does no 
harm.” In 1587 Lord Gray is said to have 
advocated the execution of Mary Queen 
of Scots with the words, “A dead woman 
bites not.”
d
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   51 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
52
dead men tell no tales  It may be expe-
dient to kill somebody who could betray 
a secret or give information about the 
criminal activities of others: “. . . in 
fi ve minutes’ time the yacht will be 
scuttled, and the cabin hatch will be 
nailed down on you. Dead men tell no 
tales; and the sailing-master’s notion is 
to leave proofs afl oat that the vessel has 
foundered with all on board” (Wilkie 
Collins, Armadale, 1866). The proverb 
was first recorded in 1664 in J. Wilson 
Andronicus Comnenius.
Variant of this proverb: a dead dog 
tells no tales.
a deaf husband and a blind wife are 
always a happy couple  A recipe for a 
successful marriage is one in which the 
husband is deaf to his wife’s constant 
chatter or nagging and the wife is blind 
to her husband’s physical shortcomings or 
misdeeds: Conjugal harmony requires toler-
ance on both sides—there is some truth in the 
old saying that “A deaf husband and a blind 
wife are always a happy couple.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded with wording close to 
the current form in 1637: “Then marriage 
may be said to be past in all quietnesse, 
When the wife is blind, and the husband 
deafe” (T. Heywood, Pleasant Dialogues). 
An earlier citation (1578) recommends 
that the man be blind and the woman 
deaf.
death before dishonor  See better death 
than dishonor.
death defi es the doctor  All patients will 
eventually die, whatever the doctors do: 
We can keep the old lady alive for months, but 
not indefi nitely: in the end death always defi es 
the doctor. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1721 in James Kelly’s A Complete Collec-
tion of Scottish Proverbs.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
medicine can prolong life, but death 
will seize the doctor, too; there’s a 
remedy for everything except death.
death is the great leveler  People of 
all ranks and classes are equal in death, 
and nobody is exempt from dying: The 
list of those who perished in the hotel fi re—
everybody from visiting dignitaries and fi lm 
stars to porters and cleaning staff—pro-
vided a sobering illustration of the adage 
“Death is the great leveler.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English in 1732, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of 
ancient origin. Compare Claudian (a.d. 
340–410), “omnia mors aequat [death lev-
els all things].” Other words have been 
substituted for death, such as religion, golf, 
AIDS, or the Internet.
Variant of this proverb: death is a 
great leveler.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
equality begins in the grave.
death keeps no calendar  Death can 
strike at any time: Death keeps no cal-
endar, which is why many people follow the 
philosophy of living every day as if it were 
their last. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1640 in George Herbert’s Outlandish 
Proverbs.
death pays all debts  The dead no lon-
ger have any obligations, fi nancial or oth-
erwise, to the living: “‘It must be sorely 
answered,’ said the peace-offi cer. ‘Never 
you mind that—death pays all debts; 
it will pay that too’” (Sir Walter Scott, 
Chronicles of the Canongate, 1827). The 
proverb occurs in Shakespeare’s play The 
dead men tell no tales
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   52 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
53
Tempest (3:3) in the form “He that dies 
pays all debts” (1597–98).
deeds, not words  What a person does is 
more important than—and may be quite 
different from—what he or she says: My 
boss has an infuriating habit of interrupting my 
lengthy excuses and explanations with the curt 
remark, “Deeds, not words.” The proverb origi-
nated in the Latin form “Facta, non verba.” It 
occurs in various forms in Shakespeare’s 
plays, such as these lines from Henry VIII 
(3:2): “‘’Tis a kind of good deed to say 
well:/And yet words are no deeds.”
deeds are fruits, words are but 
leaves  Mere words have no value unless 
they are followed by positive action: The 
new governor would do well to remember 
the proverb “Deeds are fruits, words are but 
leaves”—his predecessor promised to tackle the 
problem of juvenile crime, but nothing was ever 
done. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1616 in Thomas Draxe’s Adages.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
actions speak louder than words.
delays are dangerous  Hesitation or 
procrastination may lead to trouble or 
disaster: “‘My dear fellow, delays are dan-
gerous. Let us have done with suspense, 
and risk it, the day after to-morrow’” 
(Wilkie Collins, Queen of Hearts, 1859). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1578 
in the form “Delays breed dangers” (John 
Lyly, Euphues).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he who hesitates is lost.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: there’s luck in leisure.
deny self for self’s sake  You can do 
yourself a favor by not satisfying your 
every desire or indulging your every 
whim—self-denial and unselfi shness can 
be benefi cial to the body and soul: A 
recent survey seemed to suggest that those 
who occasionally “deny self for self’s sake” live 
longer, happier lives. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1735, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
desert and reward seldom keep company 
People are often not rewarded for their 
good deeds or meritorious behavior; con-
versely, those who do receive rewards 
have often done nothing to deserve them: 
You will fi nd that in this organization desert 
and reward seldom keep company, so do not 
expect your efforts to be recognized or appreci-
ated by those in high places. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1670 in John 
Ray’s A Collection of English Proverbs.
desires are nourished by delays  A wish 
or desire becomes stronger if it is not 
satisfi ed immediately: I had hoped that he 
would lose interest in going on the expedition 
if I made him wait until the end of the school 
year, but desires are nourished by delays and he 
is now more enthusiastic than ever. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1601, in Love’s 
Metamorphosis by John Lyly.
desperate diseases must have desperate 
remedies  Drastic action is called for—
and justifi ed—when you fi nd yourself in a 
particularly diffi cult situation: “and there 
the King . . . asked him how he could have 
the heart to intend to destroy so many 
innocent people? ‘Because,’ said Guy 
Fawkes, ‘desperate diseases need desper-
ate remedies’” (Charles Dickens, A Child’s 
History of England, 1851–53). Of ancient 
origin, the proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1539 in Richard Taverner’s 
 desperate diseases must have desperate remedies
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   53 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
54
Proverbs in the form “A strong disease 
requires a strong medicine.” Compare the 
Latin proverb “extremis malis extrema reme-
dia [extreme remedies for extreme ills].” 
The substitution of desperate for strong or 
extreme may have been infl uenced by a 
quotation from Shakespeare’s play Ham-
let (4:3): “Diseases desperate grown/By 
desperate appliance are relieved,/Or not 
at all.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
killing no murder.
the devil always leaves a stink behind 
him  Evil always leaves its taint behind: 
He exerted a baleful infl uence on everyone he 
knew and, like the devil, always left a stink 
behind him. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1591 in Henry Smith’s Sermons.
the devil can cite scripture for his pur-
pose  Passages from the Bible are some-
times quoted to support a bad idea, to 
justify wrongdoing, or simply as a hypo-
critical show of piety; used in response 
to, or as a warning against, people who 
do this: Her argument was very persuasive, and 
she reminded me of a remark on the subject that 
Jesus made to his disciples in the New Testa-
ment, but I remained wary—the devil can cite 
scripture for his purpose. The proverb comes 
from Shakespeare’s play The Merchant of 
Venice (1:3). It alludes to Jesus’ tempta-
tion in the wilderness (Matthew 4:6), 
when the devil quotes Psalm 91:11–12: 
“If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself 
down: for it is written, He shall give His 
angels charge concerning thee: and in 
their hands they shall bear thee up, lest 
at any time thou dash thy foot against a 
stone.”
Variant of this proverb: the devil can 
quote scripture to his own advantage.
the devil dances in an empty pocket 
The poor are easily tempted to do evil. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1412 
by Thomas Hoccleve in The Regiment of 
Princes. The fuller version of the proverb 
runs “the devil dances in an empty pocket 
because it contains no cross” (a reference 
to the cross that adorned the coinage in 
past centuries): “No devil so frightful as 
that which dances in the pocket where 
there is no cross to keep him out” (Walter 
Scott, Woodstock, 1826).
Proverb expressing a similar mean-
ing: the devil finds work for idle 
hands to do.
the devil fi nds work for idle hands to do 
Idle people may fi nd themselves tempted 
into wrongdoing: “There is a risk that 
youngsters will leave school and college 
to fi nd themselves unwanted, with the 
devil fi nding work for idle hands to do” 
(London Times, 1980). The proverb comes 
from a poem by Isaac Watts, published 
in his Divine Songs for Children (1715): “In 
works of labour, or of skill,/I would be 
busy too;/ For Satan fi nds some mischief 
still/For idle hands to do.” In Charles 
Dickens’s novel David Copperfi eld (1850), 
the character Mr. Wickfi eld observes, “if 
Doctor Watts knew mankind, he might 
have written, with as much truth, ‘Satan 
fi nds some mischief still, for busy hands 
to do.’ The busy people achieve their full 
share of mischief in the world, you may 
rely upon it.”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
the devil dances in an empty pocket; 
an idle brain is the devil’s workshop; 
idleness is the root of all evil.
the devil gets up to the belfry by the 
vicar’s skirts  Wicked people may oper-
the devil always leaves a stink behind him
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   54 1/29/07   5:12:24 PM
55
ate among good people in order to enact 
their schemes. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1659 in J. Howell’s Paro-
emiographia: “By the skirts of the Vicar the 
Devil climes up to the Steeple.”
Variant of this proverb: the devil 
lurks behind the cross.
the devil is in the details  The details 
of something are of paramount impor-
tance, and you should always examine 
or pay attention to them in any proposi-
tion you are considering or any proj-
ect you undertake: Read the contract very 
carefully before you sign. Remember that the 
devil is in the details, and there may be hid-
den drawbacks or unacceptable conditions that 
are not immediately apparent. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English as recently 
as the 1970s, and it may be of German, 
French, or Italian origin. It has been attrib-
uted to the Renaissance artist Michelan-
gelo (1475–1564) and the French writer 
Gustave Flaubert (1821–80), among 
others.
Variant of this proverb: God is in 
the details.
the devil is not as black as he is 
painted  People are rarely as bad 
as others say they are; often used in 
defense of a specifi c person: “Again, 
it cannot be gainsaid that the greater 
number of those who hold high places 
in our poetical literature are absolute 
nincompoops—fellows alike innocent 
of reason and of rhyme. But neither are 
we all brainless, nor is the devil himself 
so black as he is painted” (Edgar Allan 
Poe, The Quacks of Helicon, 1850). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1534, but 
with the implication that it was already 
in general use.
the devil looks after his own  Bad or 
undeserving people often prosper and 
thrive; said in response to the success or 
good fortune of such a person: She lied 
and cheated her way through college, and 
now she has risen to the very pinnacle of her 
profession—the devil looks after his own! 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1721, 
with slightly different wording, in James 
Kelly’s collection of Scottish proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: the devil 
takes care of his own.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the devil’s children have the devil’s 
luck.
the devil lurks behind the cross  See 
the devil gets up to the belfry by the 
vicar’s skirts.
the devil makes his Christmas pies of 
lawyers’ tongues and clerks’ fi ngers 
Beware of unscrupulous lawyers and their 
assistants: In commercial disputes my father was 
always anxious to steer clear of litigation, on the 
basis of the saying “The devil makes his Christ-
mas pies of lawyers’ tongues and clerks’ fi ngers.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1591, in 
John Florio’s conversation manual Second 
Fruits, with the implication that a third 
ingredient of the devil’s pie is women.
the devil’s children have the devil’s 
luck  Bad people often have good luck; 
usually said with envy rather than malice 
on hearing of somebody’s good fortune: I 
might have guessed that Richard would win the 
jackpot—the devil’s children have the devil’s 
luck! The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1678 in John Ray’s A Collection of English 
Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the devil looks after his own.
 the devil’s children have the devil’s luck
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   55 1/29/07   5:12:25 PM
56
the devil takes care of his own  See the 
devil looks after his own.
the devil was sick, the devil a saint would 
be; the devil was well, the devil a saint 
was he  People often turn to religion 
or promise to reform when they are 
ill or in trouble, only to revert to their 
former ways as soon as the crisis is over: 
The prisoner’s remorse seemed genuine, but the 
authorities were reluctant to release him, on the 
grounds that “the devil was sick, the devil a saint 
would be.” The word monk is used in place 
of saint in a medieval Latin form of the 
proverb and in its earliest English citation 
in 1629 in a sermon by Thomas Adams. 
The closing phrase “the devil a saint was 
he” means “he was not a saint at all.”
diamond cuts diamond  The only match 
for a very sharp-witted or cunning person 
is somebody of equally sharp wit or great 
cunning: She thought she had outwitted me, 
but diamond cuts diamond, and I still had a 
few tricks up my sleeve. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1604 in John Marston 
The Malcontent.
diet cures more than doctors  A sensible 
diet does more for the health than medi-
cal intervention: Her grandfather always 
insisted that diet cures more than doctors and 
never entered a hospital in his life. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1875 by A. B. 
Cheales in Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the best doctors are dr. diet, dr. 
quiet, and dr. merryman.
different strokes for different 
folks  Different people have different 
habits, methods, and tastes; also (and 
perhaps originally) used to suggest that 
different people must be approached or 
dealt with in different ways: “He dictates 
everything he writes. . . . I write out 
everything. Different strokes for different 
folks” (Alexandra Stoddard, Gift of a Letter, 
1990). The proverb is of U.S. origin, dat-
ing from the mid-20th century or earlier.
the diffi cult is done at once, the impos-
sible takes a little longer  Diffi cult 
tasks present no problem, and even those 
that seem impossible will ultimately be 
accomplished; used as a motto or policy 
statement, as in commerce: Our company 
has an excellent record of success in track-
ing down rare or out-of-print books, but we 
urge our customers to be patient—“The dif-
fi cult is done at once, the impossible takes a 
little longer.” Used as a slogan of the armed 
forces, the proverb is attributed to Louis 
XVI’s fi nance minister Charles Alexandre 
de Calonne (1734–1802). It was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1873.
dig the well before you are thirsty  Do 
not wait until it is too late to prepare for 
future necessities: He had worked out a pos-
sible escape route in case things went wrong, 
on the principle that it is better to dig the well 
before you are thirsty. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1948 in a U.S. proverb col-
lection, but it is believed to be of ancient 
origin. The Roman dramatist Plautus (c. 
254–184 b.c.) is said to have remarked, 
“It’s a wretched business to be digging a 
well just as thirst is overcoming you.”
Variant of this proverb: dig a well 
before it rains.
diligence is the mother of good 
luck  Those who work hardest are most 
likely to enjoy good fortune: “Diligence 
is the mother of good luck. . . . A man’s 
the devil takes care of his own
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   56 1/29/07   5:12:25 PM
57
success in life will be proportionate to 
his efforts” (Samuel Smiles, Thrift, 1875). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1591 in 
W. Stepney’s Spanish Schoolmaster.
dirty water will quench fi re  You cannot 
afford to be too fastidious at a time of great 
necessity; often used with specifi c refer-
ence to the satisfaction of sexual desire 
with a partner of ugly appearance or loose 
morals: “‘How could anyone go with her?’ 
Dewi shrugged. ‘They do say dirty water 
puts out fi re just as well’” (Alison G. Taylor, 
Simeon’s Bride, 1995). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546 in the form “Foul water 
as soon as fair, will quench hot fi re.”
discretion is the better part of valor  It 
is often wiser to avoid taking an unneces-
sary risk than to be recklessly courageous: 
“You have shown the discretion which 
is the better part of valour . . . had you 
attacked Sir Richard, you would now be 
lying senseless on the greensward, quite 
unable to undertake the journey that lies 
before you tomorrow” (L. P. Hartley, 
Eustace and Hilda, 1947). The proverb 
comes from Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, 
Part 1 (5:4): “The better part of valour is 
discretion; in the which better part, I have 
saved my life” (1597–98). The sentiment 
it expresses, however, is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he who fights and runs away may live 
to fight another day.
distance lends enchantment to the 
view  Distance in space or time makes 
things seem better than they are—or 
were—in reality: I remember college life as 
a happy, carefree existence, but distance lends 
enchantment to the view, and reading the dia-
ries I wrote during those years has brought back 
many painful memories. The proverb comes 
from Thomas Campbell’s poem “Pleasures 
of Hope” (1799): “’Tis distance lends 
enchantment to the view,/And robes the 
mountain in its azure hue.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
blue are the hills that are far away.
divide and conquer  The best way to 
conquer or control a group of people 
is by encouraging them to fi ght among 
themselves rather than allowing them to 
unite in opposition to the ruling authority: 
“This Republican Administration treats us 
as if we were pieces of a puzzle that can’t fi t 
together. They’ve tried to put us into com-
partments and separate us from each other. 
Their political theory is ‘divide and con-
quer’” (transcript of speech by Ann Rich-
ards, New York Times, 1988). Of Latin origin, 
the proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1605. It has been the maxim of many rulers 
and authorities throughout history.
Variant of this proverb: divide and 
rule.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
a house divided against itself cannot 
stand; united we stand, divided we fall.
do as I say, not as I do  Do what some-
body tells or advises you to do rather 
than what that person actually does him-
self or herself: This was a classic case of 
“Do as I say, not as I do”—she had appeared 
on television urging mothers to have their 
babies vaccinated, but subsequently admitted 
that she had refused the vaccine for her own 
child. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
an Anglo-Saxon text dating from before 
the 12th century.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: example is better than precept; a 
good example is the best sermon.
 do as I say, not as I do
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   57 1/29/07   5:12:26 PM
58
do as you would be done by  Treat 
other people in the way that you would 
like to be treated: Do as you would be done 
by—you can’t expect people to be honest 
with you if you persist in lying to them. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
c. 1596. It was used in a letter written by 
Lord Chesterfi eld in 1747,—“‘Do as you 
would be done by,’ is the surest method 
that I know of pleasing”—and was further 
popularized as the name of a good fairy, 
Mrs. Doasyouwouldbedoneby, in Charles 
Kingsley’s The Water Babies (1863).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
do unto others as you would they 
should do unto you.
the doctor is often more to be feared 
than the disease  Some courses of medi-
cal treatment are worse than the disease 
they aim to cure: In years gone by there 
was a deal of truth in the saying “the doctor 
is often more to be feared than the disease.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1621 by 
Robert Burton in his Anatomy of Melancholy.
the dog always returns to his vomit  Peo-
ple always return to the scene of their 
crime or wrongdoing: The police kept a 
24-hour watch on the building where the body 
was found, hoping that as a dog returns to its 
vomit, the murderer would eventually reappear. 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “As a dog 
returneth to his vomit, so a fool returneth 
to his folly” (Proverbs 26:11); “The dog is 
turned to his own vomit again; and the sow 
that was washed to her wallowing in the 
mire” (2 Peter 2:22). It also occurs in Chau-
cer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “the hound 
. . . retourneth to eten his spewying.”
dog does not eat dog  A member of a 
particular group of people will not—or 
should not—take action that will harm 
another member of the same group: 
“Except where I felt it to be absolutely 
essential . . . I have avoided any discus-
sion of criticism and critics: dog should 
not eat dog” (J. B. Priestley, Literature and 
Western Man, 1960). Of Latin origin, the 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1543. It has given rise to the cliché dog eat 
dog, referring to ruthless competition in 
industry, politics, etc.
Variant of this proverb: dog will not 
eat dog.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: hawks will not pick out hawks’ 
eyes; there’s honor among thieves.
a dog is man’s best friend  Dogs are 
more faithful than any human companion: 
“‘A dog is man’s best friend’ is an old 
adage which the defendants have either 
forgotten or decided to ignore” (Tran-
script of judgment in a case involving 
laboratory animals, New York Times, 1993). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in a letter 
written by the English poet Alexander 
Pope in 1709.
Variant of this proverb: man’s best 
friend is his dog.
the dogs bark, but the caravan goes on 
The warnings or protests of those in 
lowly positions are often ignored by those 
in power and are not allowed to stand in 
the way of progress: Disregarding public 
opinion, they went ahead with their plan—the 
dogs bark, but the caravan goes on. Of Asian 
origin, the proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1891 in John Lockwood 
Kipling’s Beast and Man in India.
dogs that bark don’t always bite  See a 
barking dog never bites.
do as you would be done by
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   58 1/29/07   5:12:26 PM
59
a dog that will fetch a bone will carry 
a bone  Beware of people who bring 
you gossip about others, because they are 
equally likely to pass on gossip about you: 
She came rushing over to tell me that Julia had 
left Peter, but I gave her no hint that my own 
marriage was heading the same way. A dog that 
will fetch a bone will carry a bone, and I didn’t 
want the whole town to know. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1830 in R. Forby’s Vocabu-
lary of East Anglia, but with the implication 
that it was already in use.
dog will not eat dog  See dog does not 
eat dog.
don’t air your dirty linen in public  See 
don’t wash your dirty linen in public.
don’t bite off more than you can 
chew  Do not take on a task that is 
larger or more diffi cult than you can 
manage: Don’t bite off more than you can 
chew—this project is far too complex to be 
tackled by a single person.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t go near the water until 
you learn how to swim; don’t start 
anything you can’t finish.
don’t bite the hand that feeds you  Do 
not behave unkindly or ungratefully 
toward those on whom you depend for 
fi nancial or other support: “And having 
looked to government for bread, on the 
very fi rst scarcity they will turn and bite 
the hand that fed them” (Edmund Burke, 
Thoughts and Details on Scarcity, 1797). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1711. 
The producer Sam Goldwyn apparently 
confused this proverb with another when 
he remarked, “That’s the way with these 
directors, they’re always biting the hand 
that lays the golden egg” (Alva Johnston, 
The Great Goldwyn, 1937).
don’t burn your bridges behind 
you  Think carefully before taking any 
step that is irrevocable, because you can-
not be sure what the future holds: You 
might want to return to this town some day, 
so try to leave it on good terms with everybody 
and don’t burn your bridges behind you. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1923 in 
A. Crowley, Confessions. It refers to the 
military practice of burning bridges as 
an army advances, making retreat impos-
sible. The fi gurative phrase to burn one’s 
boats has the same meaning.
Variant of this proverb: don’t burn 
your bridges before you.
don’t carry all your eggs in one basket 
See don’t put all your eggs in one 
basket.
don’t cast your pearls before swine  It is 
pointless to waste fi ne or beautiful things 
on people who are incapable of appreciat-
ing them: Ignoring advice not to cast pearls 
before swine, he signed up some of the greatest 
classical musicians in the country to perform at 
the concert. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, 
neither cast ye your pearls before swine, 
lest they trample them under their feet, and 
turn again and rend you” (Matthew 7:6).
Variant of this proverb: don’t throw 
pearls to swine.
don’t change horses in the middle of 
the stream  See don’t swap horses in 
midstream.
don’t change the rules in the middle 
of the game  It is wrong or unfair 
 don’t change the rules in the middle of the game
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   59 1/29/07   5:12:26 PM
60
to change the rules, terms, or condi-
tions relating to something once it is in 
progress, or after people have become 
involved in it: It is an unwritten law of busi-
ness that you don’t change the rules in the 
middle of the game, which is precisely what our 
customers have done by reducing the tolerances 
on their specifi cations.
don’t count your chickens before they are 
hatched  Do not act on the optimistic 
assumption that you will get or achieve 
something until you actually have it or are 
absolutely certain of success: “The experts, 
you know, the big dealers—we don’t want 
any publicity just yet. . . . And we don’t 
want to count our purely putative chickens 
before they’re hatched” (William Plomer, 
Museum Pieces, 1950). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1570 in the form “Count not 
thy chickens that unhatched be.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: first catch your hare; there’s 
many a slip between cup and lip.
don’t cross the bridge till you come to it 
Do not anticipate trouble or worry about 
future problems that may or may not 
arise: The case may not even come to court, 
so there’s no point in worrying whether or not 
you will have to give evidence—don’t cross 
the bridge till you come to it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1850, in the Ameri-
can poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s 
Journal, and reappeared the following 
year in his poem “The Golden Legend”: 
“Don’t cross the bridge till you come 
to it,/Is a proverb old, and of excellent 
wit.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t meet troubles halfway; suf-
ficient unto the day is the evil thereof; 
take things as they come.
don’t cry before you’re hurt  There is no 
point in upsetting yourself about some-
thing bad that may or may not happen: 
They probably have no intention of dismiss-
ing you, so don’t cry before you’re hurt. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1548, in Reliq. Antiquae, in the form “I cry 
not before I am pricked,” but a similar 
proverb existed in French more than 200 
years earlier.
don’t cry over spilled milk  See it’s no 
use crying over spilled milk.
don’t cut off your nose to spite your 
face  Do not take action to spite others 
that will harm you more than them: “For 
that money and your own infernal vanity 
you are willing to deliberately turn out 
bad work. You’ll do quite enough bad 
work without knowing it. And . . . I am 
not going to let you cut off your nose to 
spite your face for all the gold in England” 
(Rudyard Kipling, The Light That Failed, 
1890). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English c. 1560, in Deceit of Women, in the 
form “He that bites his nose off, shames 
his face,” but similar proverbs existed in 
medieval Latin and 14th-century French.
don’t get into deep water until you learn 
how to swim  See don’t go near the 
water until you learn how to swim.
don’t get mad, get even  Take positive 
action to retaliate for a wrong that has 
been done to you, rather than wasting 
your time and energy in angry recrimi-
nations: “Don’t get mad, get even” was her 
watchword, so when one of the other students 
in the art class laughed at her painting she 
calmly picked up his sculpture and dashed it 
to the ground. The proverb is of compara-
don’t count your chickens before they are hatched
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   60 1/29/07   5:12:26 PM
61
tively recent origin; it was fi rst recorded 
in 1975: “Some of the reasons have their 
roots in that wonderful law of the Boston 
Irish political jungle: ‘Don’t get mad; get 
even’” (Ben Bradlee, Conversations with 
Kennedy).
don’t give up the ship  Never stop 
fi ghting and do not surrender: My wife 
encouraged me to stand up to the bullies at 
work, and when I talked of resigning she 
always said, “Don’t give up the ship.” The 
proverb has been attributed to James 
Lawrence, commander of the U.S. frig-
ate “Chesapeake,” when he was fatally 
wounded in 1813. It fi rst appeared in 
print the following year in The Diary of F. 
Palmer, Privateersman.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never say die.
don’t go near the water until you learn 
how to swim  Do not put yourself in a 
diffi cult or dangerous situation until you 
are capable of handling it: You should not 
have agreed to take part in this mission with 
the little experience that you have. Have you 
never heard the proverb “Don’t go near the 
water until you learn how to swim”? The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1855 in the form 
“Never venture out of your depth till you 
can swim.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t get 
into deep water until you learn how to 
swim.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t bite off more than you can 
chew; don’t start anything you can’t 
finish.
don’t halloo till you are out of the 
woods  See don’t shout until you 
are out of the woods.
don’t hide your light under a bushel  If 
you have special skills or talents, do not 
conceal them through modesty and pre-
vent others from appreciating or benefi t-
ing from them: “It ain’t that I am vain, 
but that you don’t like to put your own 
light under a bushel. What’s the worth 
of your reputation, if you can’t convey 
the reason for it to the person you most 
wish to value it?” (Charles Dickens, Doctor 
Marigold, 1865). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “Neither do men light a candle, 
and put it under a bushel, but on a candle-
stick; and it giveth light unto all that are in 
the house” (Matthew 5:15).
don’t hit a man when he’s down  It 
is unkind and unsportsmanlike to cause 
further physical or mental harm to some-
body who is already suffering: “. . . while 
it did Tom’s heart good to see the cordial 
respect paid to his father, it tried his 
patience . . . to hear . . . ‘That’s the son; 
it’s hard on him. Wild fellow, do him 
good.’ ‘Granted; but you needn’t hit a 
man when he’s down,’ muttered Tom to 
himself, feeling every moment a stron-
ger desire to do something that should 
silence everybody” (Louisa May Alcott, 
An Old-Fashioned Girl, 1870). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1551 in the writ-
ings of the English archbishop Thomas 
Cranmer.
don’t judge a book by its cover  Do 
not form an opinion about something 
or somebody based solely on outward 
appearance: “Appreciate your allowing 
me to participate, but you should be 
less trusting, Ellie—can’t always judge 
a book by its cover” (Dorothy Cannell, 
Thin Woman, 1984). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1929 in the form “You can’t 
 don’t judge a book by its cover
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   61 1/29/07   5:12:26 PM
62
judge a book by its binding” in the peri-
odical American Speech.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t tell 
a book by its cover.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
the cowl does not make the monk; 
judge not according to appearances; 
there’s many a good cock come out 
of a tattered bag.
don’t judge a man until you have walked 
a mile in his boots  Do not criticize or 
pass judgment on somebody until you 
have been in the same situation, under-
gone the same experiences, or tried to do 
the same thing: I was sure that I would never 
have made such a fundamental mistake if I had 
been in his position, but I made no comment, 
remembering the old adage “Don’t judge a man 
until you have walked a mile in his boots.”
don’t jump from the frying pan into the 
fi re  Do not go from a bad situation to a 
worse one: “If it is decided that the reli-
gious fundamentalism of Iran is a danger 
to all the nations of the Middle East . . . 
then Israelis will have to ask themselves: 
Are we jumping from the frying pan into 
the fi re?” (New York Times, 1989). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in English in 1528, 
in the works of the English statesman Sir 
Thomas More, but it is of ancient origin. 
It is perhaps more frequently used in the 
form of the fi gurative phrase out of the fry-
ing pan into the fi re.
Variant of this proverb: don’t jump 
out of the frying pan into the fi re.
don’t kill the goose that lays the golden 
eggs  Take care not to destroy some-
thing valuable, such as a source of steady 
income, through greed, impatience, or a 
desire for instant gain: “All these turns 
which he was making through the streets 
seemed to indicate that he was not a 
simple and honest man. To arrest him too 
hastily would be ‘to kill the hen that laid 
the golden eggs.’ Where was the incon-
venience in waiting? Javert was very sure 
that he would not escape” (Victor Hugo, 
Les Misérables, 1862). The proverb comes 
from one of the fables of Aesop (sixth 
century b.c.), in which a farmer has a 
goose that lays golden eggs. Instead of 
being content with receiving one golden 
egg every day for the foreseeable future, 
he kills the goose in the hope of gaining 
instant access to all the gold inside. Need-
less to say, he fi nds nothing.
Variant of this proverb: don’t kill the 
goose that laid the golden egg.
don’t let the fox guard the henhouse 
Do not put somebody in a position where 
he or she will be tempted to wrongdoing: 
There was widespread outrage when it was 
discovered that a known pedophile had been 
given a job at the school. “You don’t let the fox 
guard the henhouse,” said one of the protesters. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in Contre-
League in 1589.
Variant of this proverb: don’t set a 
wolf to watch the sheep.
don’t make the same mistake twice  You 
should learn from your mistakes rather 
than repeating them: You can’t expect to get 
everything right fi rst time, but try to put past 
experience to good use and don’t make the same 
mistake twice.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
experience is the best teacher.
don’t marry for money, but don’t marry 
without money  See never marry for 
money, but marry where money is.
don’t judge a man until you have walked a mile in his boots
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   62 1/29/07   5:12:27 PM
63
don’t meet troubles halfway   Do not 
worry about problems before they actu-
ally happen: “Do not meet troubles half-
way. . . . When need arises we will see 
what can be done” (Michael Sadleir, Fanny 
by Gaslight, 1940). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1896, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of ancient origin. 
Compare Seneca (c. 4 b.c.–a.d. 65), “quid 
iuvat dolori sui occurrere? [what help is it to 
run out to meet your troubles?].”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t cross the bridge till you 
come to it; never trouble trouble 
till trouble troubles you; take things 
as they come.
don’t overload gratitude; if you do, she’ll 
kick  When people are grateful to you, 
do not take excessive advantage of the 
situation, because any sense of obliga-
tion has its limits: You seem to think that 
just because you once did me a great favor, I 
should be forever in your debt—haven’t you 
heard the proverb “Don’t overload gratitude; 
if you do, she’ll kick”? The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1741, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
don’t play with edged tools  See it’s ill 
jesting with edged tools.
don’t play with fi re  See if you play 
with fire, you get burned.
don’t put all your eggs in one bas-
ket  Spread your risks or investments 
so that if one enterprise fails you will not 
lose everything: When my aunt died, she left 
us some money, which we invested in a wide 
range of companies, not wanting to put all our 
eggs into one basket. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in the 17th century 
in Giovanni Torriano’s A Common Place of 
Italian Proverbs and Proverbial Phrases, and 
it is probably of Spanish or Italian origin. 
The earlier English proverb “Venture not 
all in one bottom [ship],” of Latin ori-
gin, expresses the same sentiment. Mark 
Twain, in Pudd’nhead Wilson (1894), gives 
a piece of alternative advice: “Put all your 
eggs in the one basket, and—watch that 
basket.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t carry 
all your eggs in one basket.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the mouse that has but one hole is 
quickly taken.
don’t put new wine in old bottles  See 
you can’t put new wine in old bot-
tles.
don’t put the cart before the horse  It 
is important to do things in the right or 
natural order; also used when people 
confuse cause and effect: Don’t put the 
cart before the horse—it’s pointless to start 
advertising for staff until you have raised the 
money to set up the business. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form c. 1520, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
first things first.
don’t rock the boat  It is often wise to 
avoid taking action or making suggestions 
that will cause upset or trouble: There are 
some who will always speak out when they 
think things should be changed, and there are 
others who remain silent, preferring not to 
rock the boat. The proverb dates from the 
1920s and was popularized by the song 
“Sit Down, You’re Rocking the Boat” in 
the musical Guys and Dolls (1950).
 don’t rock the boat
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   63 1/29/07   5:12:27 PM
64
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let sleeping dogs lie.
don’t rush the cattle  See hurry no 
man’s cattle.
don’t set a wolf to watch the sheep  See 
don’t let the fox guard the hen-
house.
don’t shoot the messenger  When you 
receive bad news, do not vent your anger 
or distress on the person who brings it: 
Enraged by a report from one of his fi nancial 
advisers, the president called for the man’s dis-
missal. He was warned against such a drastic 
step by somebody who reminded him, “The man 
only wrote the report—don’t shoot the mes-
senger.” The sentiment expressed by this 
proverb is of ancient origin: Sophocles 
wrote c. 442 b.c., “Nobody likes the man 
who brings bad news.” Its current form, 
however, is relatively recent.
don’t shoot the pianist, he’s doing his 
best  Don’t criticize somebody who is 
not to blame, or who is doing the best 
he or she can in diffi cult circumstances: 
I heard that the new temporary lecturer could 
barely control the rowdy students—but on 
the basis of “Don’t shoot the pianist, he’s 
doing his best” I decided that the best policy 
was to remain silent. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1883, in Oscar Wilde’s Per-
sonal Impressions of America, “Over the piano 
was printed a notice: Please do not shoot 
the pianist. He is doing his best” referring 
to a saloon in Leadville, Colorado.
don’t shout until you are out of the 
woods  Avoid any show of triumph or 
relief until you are sure that a period of 
diffi culty or danger is over: “Don’t holla 
till you are out of the wood. This is a night 
for praying rather than boasting” (Charles 
Kingsley, Hereward the Wake, 1866). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1770. It 
has given rise to the fi gurative phrase out 
of the woods, meaning “out of danger or 
trouble.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t halloo 
till you are out of the woods.
don’t shut the barn door after the horse 
is stolen  It is too late to take action to 
prevent an undesirable event after it has 
already occurred: “‘The union has to act 
now if it is to affect events,’ said Harley 
Shaiken, a former auto worker . . . ‘If they 
wait until the national contract expires 
in September 1993, it will be like clos-
ing the barn door after the horse has 
gotten out’” (New York Times, 1994). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1350 in 
Douce MS.
Variant of this proverb: it’s too late 
to shut the stable door after the horse 
has bolted.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s easy to be wise after the event.
don’t spoil the ship for half a penny’s 
worth of tar  Do not make petty econo-
mies that will adversely affect the fi nal 
result of something, especially if you 
have already spent a lot of money on it 
or put a lot of effort into it: “Mrs. Owen 
. . . had recommended a doctor, and 
Mildred saw him once a week. He was 
to charge fi fteen guineas. ‘Of course I 
could have got it done cheaper, but Mrs. 
Owen strongly recommended him, and 
I thought it wasn’t worth while to spoil 
the ship for a coat of tar’” (W. Somerset 
Maugham, Of Human Bondage, 1915). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1623 in the 
don’t rush the cattle
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   64 1/29/07   5:12:27 PM
65
form “A man will not lose a hog, for a 
halfpennyworth of tar.” (Tar was used to 
treat sores and wounds on farm animals.) 
The word hog was subsequently replaced 
by sheep, and through a misunderstand-
ing of rural pronunciation it ultimately 
became ship.
Variant of this proverb: don’t spoil 
the ship for a ha’porth of tar.
don’t start anything you can’t fi nish 
Do not begin something unless you are 
sure that you have suffi cient strength, 
courage, etc. to see it through to the end: 
Ignoring the advice “Don’t start anything you 
can’t fi nish,” he embarked on a costly lawsuit 
against his former employers. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1477 in Dictes and 
Sayenges of Philosophirs.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t bite off more than you can 
chew; don’t go near the water until 
you learn how to swim.
don’t swallow the cow and worry with 
the tail  See it’s idle to swallow the 
cow and choke on the tail.
don’t swap horses in midstream  Once 
you have embarked on a course of action 
or an undertaking, it is better not to 
change your tactics or methods along the 
way: “‘If ours is the true religion why do 
you not become a Catholic?’ . . . ‘Reverend 
father, we have a proverb in England never 
to swap horses while crossing a stream’” 
(Robert Graves, Goodbye to All That, 1929). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1864, 
in the works of Abraham Lincoln: “I am 
reminded . . . of a story of an old Dutch 
farmer, who remarked to a companion 
once that ‘it was best not to swap horses 
when crossing streams.’”
Variant of this proverb: don’t change 
horses in the middle of the stream.
don’t take down a fence unless you are 
sure why it was put up  Most things 
were constructed or established for a 
purpose, and it is unwise to destroy or 
dismantle them unless you are certain 
that they are not longer required: The law 
seemed outdated, but the legislators were reluc-
tant to repeal it, on the basis that you shouldn’t 
take down a fence unless you are sure why it 
was put up.
Variant of this proverb: don’t tear 
down a wall unless you are sure why it 
was put up.
don’t talk the talk if you can’t walk the 
walk  Don’t boast of something if you 
are unwilling or unable to back it up by 
your actions: It’s all very well to say you 
can climb that tree, but don’t talk the talk if 
you can’t walk the walk. The proverb fi rst 
became familiar in the USA toward the 
end of the 20th century. A more concise 
variant is “walk the talk.”
don’t teach your grandmother to suck 
eggs  Do not presume to give advice 
or instruction to those who are older 
and more experienced than you: “Why, 
if you knew how many tens of thousands 
of women, especially in New York, say 
just what you do, you’d lose all the fun 
of thinking you’re a lone genius. . . . 
There’s always about a million young 
women just out of college who want 
to teach their grandmothers how to 
suck eggs” (Sinclair Lewis, Main Street, 
1920). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1707.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
they that live longest see most.
 don’t teach your grandmother to suck eggs
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   65 1/29/07   5:12:27 PM
66
don’t tear down a wall unless you are 
sure why it was put up  See don’t take 
down a fence unless you are sure 
why it was put up.
don’t throw away your dirty water until 
you get clean  It is advisable to keep 
what you have, however unacceptable it 
has become, until you are sure that you 
can replace it with something better: 
“I’m keeping him on for the present. . . . 
It’s no good throwing away dirty water 
until one’s got clean” (Victor Bridges, 
Greensea Island, 1922). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, c. 
1475. Its current form occurs in a prov-
erb collection of 1710.
don’t throw good money after bad  If 
you have already spent money on a venture 
that seems likely to fail, do not waste any 
further money on it. The repairs to the boat 
cost me a fortune, and it’s still not seaworthy, 
so I’ve decided not to throw good money after 
bad—I’m going to save up for a new boat 
instead. The proverb was fi rst recorded in J. 
Stevens’s A New Spanish and English Diction-
ary, 1706.
don’t throw out the baby with the bath-
water  Do not take the drastic step of 
abolishing or discarding something in its 
entirety when only part of it is unaccept-
able: Let’s not throw the baby out with the 
bathwater—the law as it stands is basically 
sound, and just needs a few amendments to 
close up the loopholes. First recorded in 
English in 1853 in Thomas Carlyle, Nigger 
Question, the proverb is of German origin, 
dating from the 16th century or earlier.
don’t throw pearls to swine  See don’t 
cast your pearls before swine.
don’t wash your dirty linen in public  Do 
not discuss private disputes or family 
scandals in public: The chat-show format in 
which ordinary people air their personal griev-
ances against friends and family in front of a 
nationwide audience was obviously dreamed 
up by somebody unacquainted with the saying 
“Don’t wash your dirty linen in public.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1809 in 
T. G. Fessenden’s Pills.
Variant of this proverb: don’t air 
your dirty linen in public.
don’t wish too hard; you might just get 
what you wished for  Beware of wish-
ing for something too much, because 
you might not like it when you get it: 
Don’t wish too hard; you might just get what 
you wished for. Many who strive for fame and 
fortune—and achieve it—long to return to 
their former lives of humble obscurity. The 
sentiment expressed by this proverb is of 
ancient origin. Its variant form is associ-
ated with Oscar Wilde, and is the moral of 
his novel The Picture of Dorian Gray (1891).
Variant of this proverb: be careful 
what you wish for: you might get it.
a door must be either shut or open  You 
must choose between two alternatives, 
one of which excludes the other: You 
must decide whether you are going to accept 
or refuse their offer—there is no middle way. 
A door must be either shut or open. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1762, in Oliver 
Goldsmith’s The Citizen of the World.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t have it both ways.
do right and fear no man  Take courage 
from a clear conscience: Her motto was “Do 
right and fear no man,” so she had no qualms 
about exposing the corrupt practices of the 
don’t tear down a wall unless you are sure why it was put up
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   66 1/29/07   5:12:27 PM
67
organization, and facing the inevitable repercus-
sions. The proverb was fi rst recorded in c. 
1450. In modern use it sometimes has a 
punning extension, “don’t write and fear 
no woman.”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
a clear conscience can bear any trou-
ble; evil doers are evil dreaders.
a dose of adversity is often as needful 
as a dose of medicine  Hardship and 
misfortune may be unpleasant, but they 
can sometimes have a benefi cial effect on 
the character, especially when people fail 
to appreciate the good things they have: 
Life has always been easy for him, and this spell 
of ill luck has hit him hard. But it may be all 
for the best—they say that a dose of adversity 
is often as needful as a dose of medicine. The 
proverb is recorded as a regional expres-
sion in the United States.
do unto others as you would have them 
do unto you  Treat other people as 
you would wish them to treat you: “He 
turned the other cheek on every occa-
sion and always did unto others exactly 
as he would have had others do unto 
him” (Joseph Heller, Catch-22, 1961). The 
proverb is of biblical origin: “Therefore 
all things whatsoever ye would that men 
should do to you, do ye even so to them” 
(Matthew 7:12), “And as ye would that 
men should do to you, do ye also to them 
likewise” (Luke 6:31), and is known as the 
Golden Rule. Charles Dickens produced a 
cynical parody of the proverb, “Do other 
men, for they would do you,” in Martin 
Chuzzlewit (1843), and George Bernard 
Shaw wrote in Man and Superman (1903), 
“Do not do unto others as you would that 
they should do unto you. Their tastes may 
not be the same.”
Variant of this proverb: do unto 
others as you would they should do unto 
you.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
do as you would be done by.
do well and have well  See never do 
things by halves.
dream of a funeral and you hear of a 
marriage  According to popular super-
stition, if you dream about a funeral you 
will shortly receive news that somebody 
of your acquaintance is to be married: 
Last night I dreamed I was at the funeral of 
some famous person I’d never heard of, so I’m 
expecting a wedding invitation in the mail 
today—dream of a funeral and you hear of a 
marriage. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in J. Clarke’s Parœmiologia Anglo-Latina, 
1639 in the opposite form, “After a 
dream of weddings comes a corpse.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
dreams go by contraries.
dreams go by contraries  What happens 
in your dreams is usually the opposite of 
what is going to happen in reality: Don’t 
upset yourself—everybody has nightmares 
sometimes, and they never come true. Haven’t 
you heard the saying “Dreams go by contraries”? 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in c. 1400 
in Tale of Beryn.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: dream of a funeral and you hear of a 
marriage.
dreams retain the infi rmities of our 
character  Our weaknesses are often 
revealed—usually in symbolic disguise—
in our dreams: If it’s true that dreams retain 
the infi rmities of our character, then I hate 
to think what some of my dreams say about 
dreams retain the infi rmities of our character
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   67 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
68
me! The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Emerson’s Demonology, 1877.
a dripping June sets all in tune  A rainy 
June means there will be a good harvest 
of crops and fl owers later in the summer: 
The thought that a dripping June sets all in 
tune was of little comfort as we sheltered from 
the downpour under a tarpaulin. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1742 in the Agreeable 
Companion.
Variant of this proverb: a dry May 
and a dripping June bringeth all things 
into tune.
drive gently over the stones  Take a cau-
tious and delicate approach to any problems 
or diffi culties you encounter in life: Newly-
weds should not expect their happy, carefree state 
to last forever, but if they learn to drive gently 
over the stones, they can look forward to a long 
and successful marriage. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1711, in Jonathan Swift’s Jour-
nal to Stella: “A gallop: sit fast, sirrah, and 
don’t ride hard upon the stones.”
drive nature out of the door and it will 
return by the window  See you can 
drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back.
drought never bred dearth in England 
Because of its notoriously damp climate, 
England has never suffered famine as a 
result of lack of rainfall: Complain as much 
as you like about the weather, but drought 
never bred dearth in England. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1533 by John Hey-
wood in Play of Weather.
a drowning man will catch at a straw 
Desperate people will seize any oppor-
tunity to save themselves, however small: 
“His gratitude caught at those words, as 
the drowning man is said to catch at the 
proverbial straw.” (Wilkie Collins, My 
Lady’s Money, 1877). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1534 in Sir Thomas More’s 
Dialogue of Comfort in the form “Lyke a 
man that in peril of drowning catcheth 
whatsoever cometh next to hand . . . be it 
never so simple a sticke.”
Variant of this proverb: a drowning 
man will clutch at a straw.
drunkenness reveals what soberness 
conceals  People who have had too 
much to drink tend to reveal things they 
would otherwise keep to themselves: “It 
is an old proverbe, whatsoever is in the 
heart of the sober man, is in the mouth 
of the drunkarde” (John Lyly, Euphues: The 
Anatomy of Wit, 1578). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English c. 1387 by Geof-
frey Chaucer in The Canterbury Tales but 
was also quoted much earlier by Horace.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: alcohol will preserve anything 
but a secret; there’s truth in wine.
a dry cough is the trumpeter of death 
A dry cough often heralds death in the 
chronically ill: I don’t want to alarm you, 
but some will tell you that a dry cough is the 
trumpeter of death. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1670 by John Ray in A Collec-
tion of English Proverbs.
a dry May and a dripping June bringeth 
all things in tune  See a dripping june 
sets all in tune.
a dwarf on a giant’s shoulders sees 
further of the two  Those who build on 
the breakthroughs of their predecessors 
surpass their achievements: Modern scien-
a dripping June sets all in tune
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   68 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
69
tists are not necessarily more brilliant than 
those who have gone before, but by standing 
on giants’ shoulders they see further than their 
predecessors could. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1621 by Robert Burton in his 
Anatomy of Melancholy.
Variant of this proverb: a child on a 
giant’s shoulders sees further of the two.
DUTCH PROVERBS
The Dutch have long been famous for their achievements in commerce and trade, and so their 
stock of proverbs includes, among other subjects, a rich choice of proverbs relevant to com-
mercial transactions and the transport of goods.
The best goods are the cheapest
Better lose the anchor than the whole ship
Better poor on land than rich at sea
A crown is no cure for the headache
Everyone is a thief in his own craft
Froth is not beer
Good-looking apples are sometimes sour
Great boast, little roast
A handful of patience is worth more than a bushel of brains
He that has a choice has trouble
A man overboard, one mouth less to feed
A man without money is like a ship without sails
Poverty is the reward of idleness
The rich have many friends
Set your expense according to your trade
A usurer, a miller, a banker, and a publican are the four evangelists of Lucifer
What costs nothing is worth nothing
Who watches not catches not
The world likes to be cheated
Your friend lends and your enemy asks for payment
ååååå a dwarf on a giant’s shoulders sees further of the two
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   69 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
ååå   å
70
eagles don’t catch fl ies  People of high 
rank are considered—or consider them-
selves—too important to deal with trivial 
things or lowly folk: “‘Eagles don’t catch 
fl ies.’ ‘What do you mean?’ ‘Inspectors of 
Police don’t trail urchins’ (H. C. Bailey, 
Nobody’s Vineyard, 1942). First recorded in 
English in 1563, the proverb is of Latin 
origin: “Aquila non captat muscas [The eagle 
does not catch fl ies].”
the early bird catches the worm  Those 
who are late to act, arrive, or get up 
tend to miss opportunities already seized 
by those who came earlier: To be sure of 
getting the best-quality produce, you need 
to be among the fi rst to arrive at the mar-
ket—remember that the early bird catches 
the worm. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in William Camden, Remaines Concerning 
Britaine, 1636. It features in a joke about 
a father who tries to get his son out of bed 
in the morning by reminding him, “The 
early bird catches the worm.” “Being early 
didn’t do the worm much good, did it?” 
replies the boy.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
first come, first served.
the early man never borrows from the 
late man  Farmers who sow their crops 
in good time have a plentiful harvest and 
do not need to borrow food or money 
from others; also used in other walks of 
life: The old agricultural saying “The early 
man never borrows from the late man” could be 
applied to pensions—the sooner you start sav-
ing for your retirement, the more you will have 
to live on. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1659.
early ripe, early rotten  See soon ripe, 
soon rotten.
early to bed and early to rise, makes 
a man healthy, wealthy, and wise  A 
lifestyle that involves neither staying up 
late nor sleeping late is good for body 
and mind and leads to fi nancial success: 
“‘Early to bed and early to rise.’ Makes a 
man healthy, wealthy, and wise, McGuffi n 
replied to himself. But in Ben Volper’s 
case it was perhaps two out of three at 
best” (Robert Upton, Fade Out, 1984). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, in 1496: “As the olde englysshe 
prouerbe sayth in this wyse. Who soo woll 
ryse erly shall be holy helthy and zely” 
(Treatise of Fishing with Angle). The current 
form dates from 1639. The U.S. humorist 
James Thurber parodied the proverb in 
“The Shrike and the Chipmunks” (1939): 
“Early to rise and early to bed makes a 
male healthy and wealthy and dead.”
e
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   70 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
71
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one hour’s sleep before midnight is 
worth two after.
easier said than done  It is usually far 
easier to advise, suggest, or talk about 
doing something than actually to do it: 
“‘Why don’t some one kill him?’ was Joe’s 
sharp question. ‘Easier said than done, lad’” 
(Zane Grey, Spirit of the Border, 1905). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1483 in the 
form “It is easier to say than to do.”
Variant of this proverb: sooner said 
than done.
east, west, home’s best  No matter how 
far you travel, you will never fi nd a place 
that is better than your own home; usu-
ally said by a returning traveler: “‘You’re 
soon returned, my dear,’ said Agathya 
Mikhailovna. ‘I grew homesick, Agathya 
Mikhailovna. East or West, home is best,’ 
he answered, and went into his study” 
(Leo Tolstoy, Anna Karenina, 1873–77). 
Of German origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1859.
Variant of this proverb: travel east 
and travel west, a man’s own home is still 
the best.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: home is home, be it ever so homely; 
there’s no place like home.
East is East and West is West and never 
the twain shall meet  People who are 
very different in background or outlook 
are likely never to agree: Please try to keep off 
politics at the dinner party tonight—you know 
that you will never bring Matt around to your 
way of thinking. East is East and West is West 
and never the twain shall meet! The proverb 
comes from Rudyard Kipling’s poem “The 
Ballad of East and West” (1889).
easy come, easy go  Things that are eas-
ily acquired, especially money, are just as 
easily lost or spent: “I doubt the ability 
of any of them to keep money more than 
fi ve years at the rate they’re spending. 
Easy come, easy go” (Margaret Mitchell, 
Gone with the Wind, 1936). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1832, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of much 
earlier origin, occurring in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “And lightly as 
it comth, so wol we spende.”
Variant of this proverb: light come, 
light go.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
quickly come, quickly go.
easy does it  A cautious or gentle 
approach, such as to a diffi cult task or an 
awkward person, is often best: Easy does 
it. It’s best to be very careful when dealing with 
your Uncle Jack—he’s old and ill and doesn’t 
take kindly to being disturbed. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1863 in T. Taylor’s 
Ticket-of-Leave Man.
Variant of this proverb: gently does it.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
softly, softly, catchee monkey.
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we 
die  Live life to the full every day, because 
death could strike at any time: The latest 
government health campaign warns that those 
who live their lives too literally according to the 
proverb “Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow 
we die” may actually be hastening their own 
deaths by overindulgence. The proverb is of 
biblical origin—it occurs in four passages 
in the Old and New Testaments, none of 
which exactly mirrors its current form: “a 
man hath no better thing under the sun, 
than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry” 
(Ecclesiastes 8:15); “let us eat and drink; 
 eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   71 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
72
for to morrow we shall die” (Isaiah 22:13); 
“eat, drink, and be merry” (Luke 12:19); 
“let us eat and drink; for to morrow we 
die” (1 Corinthians 15:32).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: gather ye rosebuds while ye may; 
live every day as though it were your 
last; seize the day.
eat to live, do not live to eat  The main 
purpose of eating is to stay fi t and healthy—
it should not be regarded solely as a source 
of pleasure, which inevitably leads to exces-
sive consumption of the wrong types of 
food: As children we hated taking tea with our 
grandmother, whose motto was “Eat to live, do 
not live to eat” and whose table was accordingly 
bare of cookies, pastries, and all the other things 
that would have made these visits bearable. The 
proverb is attributed to the ancient Greek 
philosopher Socrates (469–399 b.c.). An 
article in the New York Times (1982) made 
the telling observation, “Until recently the 
world was divided into those who eat to 
live and those who live to eat.”
eavesdroppers hear no good of them-
selves  See listeners never hear any 
good of themselves.
education doesn’t come by bumping your 
head against the schoolhouse  Educa-
tion can only be acquired by studying, and 
by listening and talking to teachers: Chil-
dren must learn to read with understanding, 
and to ask questions in class when they do not 
understand. Education doesn’t come by bumping 
your head against the schoolhouse. The prov-
erb is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
an elephant never forgets  Some people 
have an extraordinary ability to remember 
things, especially wrongs done to them; 
used by or of such a person: You may live to 
regret insulting my brother—an elephant never 
forgets. It has been suggested that this is a 
variant of an ancient Greek proverb, “The 
camel never forgets an injury,” but other 
authorities interpret it more favorably as 
a tribute to the elephant’s apparent intel-
ligence and ability to remember acts of 
kindness. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English in W. Martyn, Blue Ridge (1937).
an empty bag cannot stand  See an 
empty sack cannot stand upright.
an empty barrel makes the most 
noise  See empty vessels make the most 
sound.
an empty sack cannot stand upright 
People who are poor or hungry cannot 
survive, work effectively, or remain honest: 
You’d better have a good breakfast before you set 
off—an empty sack cannot stand upright. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1642 in a 
collection of Italian proverbs, with the note 
“Applied to such as either pinch themselves, 
or are pincht by hard fortune.”
Variant of this proverb: an empty bag 
cannot stand.
empty vessels make the most 
sound  Foolish people are the most talk-
ative; often used as a put-down to some-
body who chatters incessantly: Don’t be 
deceived by his glib patter—remember that 
empty vessels make the most sound. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded before 1430. It 
occurs in Shakespeare’s Henry V (4:4), “I 
did never know so full a voice issue 
from so empty a heart: but the saying is 
true—The empty vessel makes the great-
est sound.” In Ulysses (1922), James Joyce 
eat to live, do not live to eat
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   72 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
73
toys with the literal meaning of the prov-
erb: “Chamber music. Could make a kind 
of pun on that. . . . Tinkling. Empty vessels 
make most noise. Because the acoustics, 
the resonance changes according as the 
weight of the water is equal to the law of 
falling water.”
Variant of this proverb: an empty 
barrel makes the most noise.
the end crowns the work  The outcome 
or conclusion of an enterprise is the basis 
on which it is judged: “‘But proof, sir, 
proof must be built up stone by stone,’ 
said the Mayor. ‘As I say, the end crowns 
the work’” (Charles Dickens, The Mystery 
of Edwin Drood, 1870). Of Latin origin, 
the proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in the 16th century. It occurs in Shake-
speare’s play Troilus and Cressida (4:5) “The 
end crowns all,/And that old common 
arbitrator, Time,/Will one day end it.”
Variant of this proverb: the end 
crowns all.
the end justifi es the means  Any course 
of action, however immoral or unscrupu-
lous, is justifi able if it achieves a worthy 
objective: “It was a fundamental principle 
of the order that the end justifi es the 
means. By this code, lying, theft, perjury, 
assassination, were not only pardonable 
but commendable, when they served the 
interests of the church” (Ellen G. White, 
The Great Controversy between Christ and 
Satan, 1888). The proverb has been traced 
back to the works of the Roman poet 
Ovid (43 b.c.–a.d. 18): “exitus acta probat 
[the outcome justifi es the deeds].” It was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1583.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: never do evil that good may come 
of it.
the enemy of my enemy is my 
friend  Those who dislike or oppose the 
same person or thing are bound to be 
friends or allies: “While the government 
of Iran had no great sympathy for Com-
munism, they apparently believed that the 
Sandinistas qualifi ed for that old Middle 
Eastern proverb: the enemy of my enemy 
is my friend” (Oliver L. North, Under Fire, 
1991). The proverb is of ancient Arab 
origin.
the English are a nation of shopkeepers 
It is in the national character of the English 
to be preoccupied with commercial, mid-
dle-class concerns: “Americans . . . are a 
nation of salesmen just as the English are a 
nation of small shopkeepers” (Ruth Ren-
dell, Put on by Cunning, 1981). The proverb 
began as a quotation from Adam Smith’s 
The Wealth of Nations, published in 1776, 
but is usually associated with Napoleon.
an Englishman’s home is his castle  See 
a man’s home is his castle.
enough is as good as a feast  A mod-
erate amount is suffi cient; often said by 
somebody who does not want any more: 
“‘Fighting? . . . what have you seen but a 
skirmish or two?—Ah! if you saw war on 
the grand scale—sixty or a hundred thou-
sand men in the fi eld on each side!’ ‘I am 
not at all curious, Colonel.—“Enough,” 
says our homely proverb, “is as good as a 
feast’ ” (Sir Walter Scott, Waverly, 1814). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form c. 1470 in Sir Thomas Malory’s Le 
Morte d’Arthur. In The Picture of Dorian Gray 
(1891), Oscar Wilde presented the oppo-
site view: “Moderation is a fatal thing. 
Enough is as bad as a meal. More than 
enough is as good as a feast.”
 enough is as good as a feast
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   73 1/29/07   5:12:28 PM
74
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
enough is enough; moderation in all 
things; there’s measure in all things.
enough is enough  Enough of something 
is suffi cient: I could have stayed all night but 
enough is enough. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546 by John Heywood in 
A Dialogue containing . . . the Proverbs in 
the English Tongue, but it is ultimately of 
Roman origin and is common to several 
European languages. Today it is usually 
employed when calling for an end to 
something irritating or something threat-
ening to get out of control.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
enough is as good as a feast.
envy never dies  Envy does not fade 
with passing time: “Hatred hath an end, 
envy never ceaseth” (Robert Burton, 
Anatomy of Melancholy, 1624). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1523–25 by John 
Berners in Froissart but is of older, possibly 
Roman, origin.
equality begins in the grave  Only in 
death are all people truly equal: Don’t talk 
to me about equality—discrimination and 
injustice are rife in modern society, and equal-
ity begins in the grave.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
death is the great leveler.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: all men are created equal.
even a blind pig occasionally picks up 
an acorn  An incompetent person or an 
unsystematic approach is bound to suc-
ceed every now and then by chance: I was 
the worst basketball player in the school, so I 
was almost as surprised as everybody else when 
my shot went through the hoop. I guess it’s 
true that even a blind pig occasionally picks 
up an acorn.
even a worm will turn  Even the most 
humble or submissive person will ulti-
mately respond in anger to excessive 
harassment or exploitation: “If he intended 
to be sullen with her to the end, and to 
show his contempt for her, she would 
turn against him. ‘The worm will turn,’ 
she said to herself. And yet she did not 
think herself a worm” (Anthony Trollope, 
The Eustace Diamonds, 1873). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1546 in the form 
“Tread a worm on the tail, and it must 
turn again.” It occurs in Shakespeare’s play 
Henry VI, Part 3 (2:2), “The smallest worm 
will turn being trodden on.”
Variant of this proverb: the worm 
will turn.
even Homer sometimes nods  See 
homer sometimes nods.
even the best of friends must part  See 
the best of friends must part.
everybody has his fi fteen minutes of 
fame  Most people will fi nd themselves 
briefl y in the public eye at least once in 
their lives: Everybody has his fi fteen minutes 
of fame, and my turn came when I found myself 
hailed as a hero for diving into the lake to rescue 
the drowning child. The proverb is associated 
with the U.S. artist Andy Warhol, who 
prophetically remarked in the 1960s, “In 
the future everyone will be famous for 
fi fteen minutes.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every dog has his day.
everybody loves a lord  Members of the 
aristocracy, and other wealthy or infl uen-
enough is enough
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   74 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
75
tial people, are never short of admirers 
or fl atterers among the general public: 
“All the human race loves a lord—that is, 
loves to look upon or be noticed by the 
possessor of Power or Conspicuousness” 
(Mark Twain, The $30,000 Bequest, 1906). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1869 by 
F. J. Furnivall in Queen Elizabeth’s Academy.
everybody’s business is nobody’s busi-
ness  Matters that are of general con-
cern, but are the responsibility of nobody 
in particular, tend to get neglected because 
everybody thinks that somebody else 
should deal with them: It was a classic case of 
“Everybody’s business is nobody’s business”—the 
document had been passed from one department 
to another, but no action had been taken. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1611, but 
the sentiment it expresses occurs in the 
writings of Aristotle: “A matter common 
to most men receives least attention.”
everybody speaks well of the bridge that 
carries him over  See praise the bridge 
that carries you over.
everybody’s queer but you and me, and 
even you are a little queer  There are 
times when it seems that you are the only 
normal or sane person in the world: I’m 
amazed that such a crazy proposal should have 
such widespread public support—it just goes to 
prove the old saying, “Everybody’s queer but you 
and me, and even you are a little queer.” The 
proverb has been attributed to the social 
reformer Robert Owen (1771–1858).
everybody stretches his legs according 
to the length of his coverlet  People 
must adapt themselves to their circum-
stances and live within their means: We 
had to make some drastic changes to our 
lifestyle when my husband lost his job, but we 
coped—everybody stretches his legs according 
to the length of his coverlet. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1550 in W. 
Harrys’s Market or Fair of Usurers.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: cut your coat according to your 
cloth; stretch your arm no further 
than your sleeve will reach.
everybody talks about the weather, but 
nobody does anything about it  People 
are always ready to complain about a 
problem but never willing to solve it: 
Successive administrations have expressed their 
concern about the rise in juvenile crime, but 
no positive steps have been taken to curtail 
it—everybody talks about the weather, but 
nobody does anything about it. The proverb 
is attributed to Mark Twain or his friend 
Charles Dudley Warner.
everybody to whom much is given, of 
him will much be required  More is 
expected of those who have received 
more—that is, those who have had good 
fortune, are naturally gifted, or have been 
shown special favor: “‘Throughout my 
professional career, I have been privileged 
to assist people with their vocational aspi-
rations. I have done so for two reasons. 
First, I stand on the shoulders of many 
individuals who have helped me. Second, 
I believe “to whom much is given much is 
required” so I have tried to lend a helping 
hand’” (Vernon Jordan’s statement quoted 
in Bill Clinton’s response to the Starr 
Report, 1998). The proverb is of bibli-
cal origin: “For unto whomsoever much 
is given, of him shall be much required: 
and to whom men have committed much, 
of him they will ask the more” (Luke 
12:48).
 everybody to whom much is given, of him will much be required
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   75 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
76
every bullet has its billet  In a life-
threatening situation, destiny decides who 
will die and who will survive: “‘Why 
run risks, Captain? You should dismount,’ 
he said. ‘Oh, every bullet has its billet,’ 
answered Vaska Denisov, turning in his sad-
dle” (Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, 1863–69). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1575 in 
George Gascoigne’s Fruits of War: “every 
bullet hath a lighting place.” Its current 
form has been attributed to King William 
III (1650–1702). The military superstition 
that every bullet has somebody’s name on 
it is a modern variant of this proverb.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you’re born to be hanged, then 
you’ll never be drowned.
every cloud has a silver lining  Even 
the most unpleasant experience or 
depressing situation may have a consoling 
aspect or hopeful prospect; used to raise 
somebody’s spirits, or said by those who 
discover a hidden advantage in their mis-
fortune: I was devastated when the accident 
put an end to my sporting career, but in the idle 
days that followed I discovered I had a talent 
for writing. Every cloud has a silver lining, so 
they say. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1863. Noël Coward was less optimistic 
when he wrote the song “There are Bad 
Times Just Around the Corner” (1953), 
which says “it’s no good whining/About 
a silver lining” in the approaching dark 
clouds.
Variant of this proverb: the darkest 
cloud has a silver lining.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
april showers bring may flowers.
every cock will crow upon his own dung-
hill  People are always at their bravest or 
most self-assured when they are on their 
own home territory: Every cock will crow 
upon his own dunghill, but by the time they had 
crossed to the other side of town, where a rival 
gang held sway, they were looking distinctly ill 
at ease. The proverb is of ancient origin, 
and has been traced back to the writings 
of Seneca (c. 4 b.c.–a.d. 65): “gallum in suo 
sterquilinio plurimum posse [the cock is most 
powerful on his own dunghill].”
Variants of this proverb: a cock is 
mighty in his own backyard; every dog is 
a lion at home.
every cook praises his own broth  Peo-
ple tend to sing the praises of their own 
work. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1663 in Gerbier’s Counsel: “Every cook 
commends his own sauce.”
every country has its own customs  See 
so many countries, so many customs.
every dog has his day  Everybody has a 
spell of good fortune, success, or fame at 
least once in his or her life: Don’t begrudge 
him his moment of triumph—every dog has 
his day. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1545. It occurs in Shakespeare’s play 
Hamlet (5:1): “The cat will mew, and dog 
will have his day.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
everybody has his fifteen minutes of 
fame.
every dog is a lion at home  See every 
cock will crow upon his own dung-
hill.
every dog is allowed one bite  Some-
body may be forgiven for a single misde-
meanor, provided that it does not happen 
again: First offenders are usually let off with a 
warning, on the basis that every dog is allowed 
every bullet has its billet
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   76 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
77
one bite. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1902, but the law on which it based dates 
from at least the 17th century, according 
to which the owner of a domestic animal 
was not responsible for injury caused by 
the animal unless the owner knew of the 
animal’s ferocious tendencies.
every door may be shut but death’s 
door  Death comes to us all, and is the 
only thing in life over which we have 
no control: She knew that she had only a 
few days left to live, and seemed to be facing 
the prospect with uncharacteristic acquies-
cence. “Every door may be shut but death’s 
door,” she explained. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection.
every elm has its man  Elm trees are 
notorious for causing death or serious 
injury: “Owing to the frequency with which 
this tree sheds its branches, or is uprooted 
in a storm, it has earned for itself a sinister 
reputation. ‘Every elm has its man’ is an old 
country saying” (London Times, 1928).
every employee tends to rise to his level 
of incompetence  People in a hierarchi-
cal organization are promoted until they 
reach a position that is just beyond their 
capabilities; this cynical observation implies 
that nobody is fi t to do the work he or she 
is employed to do: The monthly meeting of 
departmental managers did nothing to destroy 
my belief in the theory that every employee tends 
to rise to his level of incompetence. This prov-
erb is known as “The Peter Principle,” hav-
ing been coined by Dr. Laurence J. Peter in 
a book of that name (1969).
every family has a skeleton in the closet 
See there’s a skeleton in every closet.
every herring must hang by its own 
gill  Everybody must take responsibility 
for his or her own actions: If you get into 
trouble, don’t expect me to come and bail you 
out—every herring must hang by its own gill. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1609 by 
Simon Harward, with tail in place of gill.
every horse thinks its own pack heaviest 
Everybody thinks that he or she has harder 
work, greater misfortune, or more prob-
lems than others: I tend to ignore her when she 
starts moaning about her troubles. Every horse 
thinks its own pack heaviest, and I don’t believe 
she is any worse off than the rest of us. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1732, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
earlier origin: in 1573 George Gascoigne 
wrote, “Every body thinketh their own 
greif greatest.”
every Jack has his Jill  Everybody will 
ultimately fi nd a suitable person to share 
his or her life with: “Every Jack has his 
Jill;/If one won’t, the other will” (H. W. 
Thompson, Body, Boots and Britches, 1940). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1611 
in Randle Cotgrave’s A Dictionary of the 
French and English Tongues.
Variant of this proverb: there’s a Jack 
for every Jill.
every land has its own law  Each nation, 
region, class, or profession has its own rules 
and customs, which must be respected by 
outsiders: The traveler must learn to be toler-
ant of the ways of others, remembering that every 
land has its own law. Of Scottish origin, the 
proverb dates from before 1628.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
so many countries, so many customs.
every little helps  All contributions, 
however small, are of use: “‘The Petition 
 every little helps
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   77 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
78
for the Branch Bill is in the coffee-room. 
Would you put your name to it? Every 
little helps’” (Charles Dickens, The Uncom-
mercial Traveller, 1861). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1787, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin. 
In 1623 William Camden wrote, “Euery 
thing helpes, quoth the Wren when she 
pist i’ the sea,” echoing a French saying of 
the 16th century that featured an ant mak-
ing a similar contribution to the waters of 
the ocean.
Variant of this proverb: every little 
bit helps.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: little drops of water, little 
grains of sand, make a mighty ocean 
and a pleasant land; many a little 
makes a mickle.
every man after his fashion  Every indi-
vidual must follow his or her own inclina-
tion: When it came to what to do with their 
free time it was a case of every man after his 
fashion. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1546 by John Heywood in A Dialogue 
containing . . . the Proverbs in the English 
Tongue.
Variant of this proverb: every one 
after his fashion.
every man for himself and God for us 
all  At times of crisis or great danger, 
each must take responsibility for his or 
her own personal survival and hope for 
divine protection for everybody: “‘Every 
man for himself, and God for us all!’ was 
the cool answer of the refractory sea-
man” (Captain Marryat, The King’s Own, 
1830). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1546. In the shorter form “Every 
man for himself ” it is of earlier origin, 
occurring in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales 
(c. 1390): “Ech man for hymself, ther is 
noon oother.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every man for himself and the devil 
take the hindmost.
every man for himself and the devil take 
the hindmost  In highly competitive or 
dangerous situations, you must guard or 
pursue your own interests with ruthless 
disregard for those who are falling behind 
or struggling to cope: “The result was a 
bear-garden, a den of prize-fi ghters, liars, 
cut-throats and thieves in which every man 
was for himself openly and avowedly and 
the devil take the hindmost” (Theodore 
Dreiser, The Genius, 1915). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1858, 
but it is of earlier origin. Either of its two 
parts may be used independently: “The 
devil take the hindmost” occurs in Francis 
Beaumont and John Fletcher’s play Philas-
ter (1620) and expresses a sentiment found 
in the writings of the Roman poet Horace 
(65–8 b.c.), “occupet extremum scabies [may 
the itch take the one who is last].”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every man for himself and god 
for us all; self-preservation is the 
first law of nature.
every man has his price  It is possible to 
bribe anybody, as long as you offer him or 
her enough money: “‘You can do nothing 
with Mowle. He never took a penny in 
his life.’ ‘Oh, every man has his price’” 
(G. P. R. James, The Smuggler, 1845). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1734, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
general use.
every man is his own worst enemy  Peo-
ple often suffer most as a result of their 
every man after his fashion
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   78 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
79
own behavior, attitudes, or nature: They 
say that every man is his own worst enemy, 
and if you weren’t so tactless and insensitive 
you might fi nd it easier to keep your friends! 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in Thomas 
Browne’s Religio Medici (1643).
every man is the architect of his own 
fortune  Everybody is responsible for 
his or her own success or failure in life: 
Every man is the architect of his own fortune, 
and nobody else can be blamed for the fool-
ish decisions that brought you to this crisis. 
The proverb is attributed to the Roman 
politician Appius Claudius Caecus, who 
held the post of censor from 312 b.c. to 
308 b.c.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: life is what you make it; paddle 
your own canoe.
every man must skin his own skunk 
People should be self-reliant and not 
depend on others to do things—espe-
cially unpleasant tasks—for them: She 
raised her children to be independent and 
responsible members of society, one of her favor-
ite sayings being “Every man must skin his own 
skunk.” Of U.S. origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in Dictionary of American-
isms, 1813.
every man thinks his own geese 
swans  Everybody tends to rate his or 
her own children, possessions, or achieve-
ments more highly than others would do: 
We are up against that age-old problem: the 
parents of our students will not accept that 
their offspring are anything but perfect. As the 
saying goes, “Every man thinks his own geese 
swans.” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1526 in the play Magnyfycence by John 
Skelton.
every man to his taste  Different things 
appeal to different people, and taste is a 
highly subjective quality: I wouldn’t want 
a picture like that hanging in my house, but 
every man to his taste. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
1580. It is sometimes quoted in its French 
form, “Chacun à son goût,” or with the face-
tious extension “. . . as the old woman said 
when she kissed the cow.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: one man’s meat is another man’s 
poison; tastes differ; to each his 
own.
every man to his trade  People should 
remain within their own line of work or 
range of knowledge: “. . . one man showed 
me a young oak which he had trans-
planted from behind the town, thinking it 
an apple-tree. But every man to his trade. 
Though he had little woodcraft, he was 
not the less weatherwise, and gave us one 
piece of information; viz. he had observed 
that when a thunder-cloud came up with 
a fl ood-tide it did not rain” (Henry David 
Thoreau, Cape Cod, 1865). The proverb 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, Part 
1 (2:2) in the form: “Every man to his 
business.” The sentiment it expresses is of 
biblical origin: “Let every man abide in 
the same calling wherein he was called” (1 
Corinthians 7:20).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let the cobbler stick to his last.
every one after his fashion   See every 
man after his fashion.
every picture tells a story  Meaning 
is often conveyed by people’s actions, 
movements, gestures, or facial expres-
sions without the need for words: Nobody 
 every picture tells a story
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   79 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
80
actually passed comment on the food, but 
every picture tells a story, and the row of 
empty plates told me all I needed to know. 
First recorded in 1847, the proverb was 
popularized in the early 20th century in 
an advertisement for a backache remedy 
featuring a picture of a person bent 
double in pain.
every rose has a thorn  See there’s no 
rose without a thorn.
every soldier has the baton of a fi eld-
marshal in his knapsack A common 
soldier, or any other worker, may aspire 
to senior rank: He entered the business as a 
lowly sales assistant, but every soldier has the 
baton of a fi eld-marshal in his knapsack and 
fi ve years later he owned the company. First 
recorded in English in 1840, the proverb 
is commonly ascribed to Napoleon, in 
whose army many senior offi cers rose 
from the ranks.
everything comes to those who wait  See 
all things come to him who waits.
everything has an end  Nothing lasts for-
ever; often used of something unpleasant: 
“They devoured the food, and I did like-
wise. . . . everything has an end, everything 
passes away, even the hunger of people 
who have not eaten for fi fteen hours” (Jules 
Verne, 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, 1869). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1385 in 
Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde.
Variant of this proverb: all things 
come to an end.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
time ends all things.
everything is good in its season Food-
stuffs and other items are best enjoyed 
when at their prime: Everything is good 
in its season, but few vegetables are at their 
best all year round. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1591 by W. Stepney in The 
Spanish Schoolmaster.
everything old is new again  Old ideas, 
fashions, or methods often return to 
popularity after a long absence, and are 
sometimes perceived or presented as 
innovations: “Like so many products on 
the market today, fruit butters prove the 
adage, ‘What’s old is new again’” (New 
York Times, 1991). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1824, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of much earlier 
origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s nothing new under the sun.
every tub must stand on its own bottom 
People should be self-suffi cient and not 
dependent on others, fi nancially or oth-
erwise: “She would have had me support 
the old man in idleness, but I am not one 
of that kind. Every tub should stand on 
its own bottom” (Horatio Alger, Driven 
from Home, 1889). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1564 in W. Bullein’s Dia-
logue Against Fever. The word stand may be 
replaced by sit or rest.
every why hath its wherefore Everything 
has an underlying reason: “For they say 
every why hath a wherefore” (William 
Shakespeare, The Comedy of Errors). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1566 by 
George Gascoigne in Supposes.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s reason in all things.
evil be to him who thinks it Those 
who wish ill upon others deserve ill 
every rose has a thorn
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   80 1/29/07   5:12:29 PM
81
luck themselves. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1387 by Geoffrey Chaucer in 
The Canterbury Tales: “Now the evyl which 
men wysshe to other cometh to hym 
which wyssheth it.”
evil communications corrupt good man-
ners  Good people can be led astray by 
listening to bad ideas, associating with 
bad people, or following a bad example: 
His parents did their best to steer him away 
from potentially harmful infl uences during his 
formative years, on the basis that evil commu-
nications corrupt good manners. The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “Be not deceived: evil 
communications corrupt good manners” 
(1 Corinthians 15:33).
evil doers are evil dreaders  Criminals 
and other wrongdoers have a tendency 
to fear and suspect all those around them; 
sometimes used to imply that a distrust-
ful person has something on his or her 
conscience: “Put me not to quote the old 
saw, that evil doers are evil dreaders.—It is 
your suspicion, not your knowledge, which 
speaks” (Sir Walter Scott, The Fair Maid 
of Perth, 1828). The proverb dates from 
before 1568 in the form “Ill doings, breed 
ill thinkings” (R. Ascham, Schoolmaster).
Variant of this proverb: Ill doers are 
ill dreaders.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
do right and fear no man.
example is better than precept  It is 
better to teach somebody what to do by 
doing it yourself rather than by giving 
advice or instructions; usually applied to 
correct behavior, but equally applicable 
in other contexts: Example is better than 
precept, and if more parents could be persuaded 
to adopt a healthy lifestyle, then perhaps their 
children would follow suit. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, c. 
1400.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good example is the best sermon.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: do as i say, not as i do.
the exception proves the rule  The exis-
tence of an exception to a rule shows that 
the rule itself exists and is applicable in 
other cases; often used loosely to explain 
away any such inconsistency: “You will 
fi nd no such unimaginative people any-
where as you fi nd in Italy, Spain, Greece, 
and the other Southern countries. . . . 
Now and then, in the course of centuries, 
a great genius springs up among them; 
and he is the exception which proves 
the rule” (Wilkie Collins, The Haunted 
Hotel, 1878). First recorded in this form 
in 1664, the proverb is of Latin origin: 
“exceptio probat regulam in casibus non excep-
tis [the exception confi rms the rule in 
cases not excepted].” In his Devil’s Dic-
tionary (1911), the U.S. writer Ambrose 
Bierce observed: “‘The exception proves 
the rule’ is an expression constantly upon 
the lips of the ignorant, who parrot it 
from one another with never a thought of 
its absurdity.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s an exception to every rule.
expect nothing and you won’t be dis-
appointed  See blessed are they who 
expect nothing, for they shall not be 
disappointed.
experience is a comb that fate gives a 
man when his hair is all gone  Experi-
ence often comes too late to be of any use: 
It was only after working in the industry for 
 experience is a comb that fate gives a man when his hair is all gone
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   81 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
82
many years that I realized what a foolish invest-
ment I had made at the outset. As they say, expe-
rience is a comb which fate gives a man when his 
hair is all gone. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
experience is the best teacher  The best 
way to learn is by doing things yourself, 
and by having the good sense not to 
repeat any mistakes you make along the 
way: Experience is the best teacher, and I soon 
learned to approach the larger animals in my 
care with a mixture of caution and respect. 
First recorded in this form in 1803, the 
proverb is of Latin origin: “experientia docet 
[experience teaches].”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
don’t make the same mistake twice; an 
ounce of practice is worth a pound of 
precept; years know more than books.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: experience is the teacher of fools.
experience is the mother of wisdom 
You cannot attain great wisdom or knowl-
edge other than by practical experience 
and learning from your mistakes: “If it 
be true, that experience is the mother of 
wisdom, history must be an improving 
teacher” (American Museum, 1788). First 
recorded in the 16th century, the proverb 
is of ancient Greek origin.
Variants of this proverb: experience 
is the father of wisdom; experience is the 
mother of knowledge.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: live and learn; the older the 
wiser.
experience is the teacher of fools  It 
is foolish to learn—or to expect other 
people to learn—solely by making mis-
takes; also used with the implication that 
wise people learn from others’ mistakes 
rather than their own: How many more 
patients must be killed by inadequately trained 
medical staff before the government will accept 
the fact that experience is the teacher of fools? 
The proverb dates from before 1568 in 
the form “Experience is the common 
schoolhouse of fools.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
learn from the mistakes of others.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: experience is the best teacher.
experience keeps a dear school  Learn-
ing by your mistakes is often a costly 
exercise: Experience keeps a dear school, and 
the armed forces are now counting the cost of 
this ill-fated mission. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1743, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Variant of this proverb: experience 
keeps a dear school, but fools will learn 
in no other.  
extremes meet  People and things that 
seem to be diametrically opposed are 
often found to have a point of contact: 
“. . . the contrast could not be much 
greater between . . . a meek sheep and the 
rough-coated keen-eyed dog, its guardian. 
He had spoken of Mr. Rochester as an old 
friend. A curious friendship theirs must 
have been: a pointed illustration, indeed, 
of the old adage that ‘extremes meet’” 
(Charlotte Brontë, Jane Eyre, 1847). The 
proverb comes from the French mathema-
tician and writer Pascal’s Pensées (1669): 
“les extrèmes se touchent [extremes meet].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opposites attract.
an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a 
tooth  Retaliation or punishment should 
experience is the best teacher
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   82 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
83
take the same form as the original offense 
or crime: In a country where the justice system 
is based on the principle of “An eye for an eye, 
and a tooth for a tooth,” the death penalty is 
the only appropriate punishment for the crime 
of murder. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for 
hand, foot for foot” (Exodus 21:24).
the eye is bigger than the belly  Greed 
persuades a person to take more than 
he or she can manage: He had to concede, 
as he pushed his plate away, that his eye was 
bigger than his belly. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1580 by John Lyly in 
Euphues and his England. The proverb is 
usually quoted in relation to food but 
may also be applied in other contexts, 
such as money.
the eye of a master does more work 
than both his hands  Constant super-
vision is the key to getting the best 
performance from your employees or 
domestic staff: If you want to increase 
productivity, get out of your cozy little offi ce 
and spend more time in the factory—the eye 
of the master does more work than both his 
hands. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1744, in Benjamin Franklin’s Poor 
Richard’s Almanack.
the eyes are the mirrors of the soul  A 
person’s eyes will often reveal his or her 
inmost thoughts, feelings, or character: 
Aware that the eyes are the mirrors of the soul, 
and anxious to keep her true feelings from him, 
she turned her face away before she spoke. First 
recorded in English in 1545 in T. Phaer’s 
Regiment of Life, the proverb is of Latin 
origin.
Variants of this proverb: the eyes are 
the windows of the soul; the face is the 
index of the mind.
 the eyes are the mirrors of the soul
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   83 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
ååå   å
84
the face is the index of the mind  See 
the eyes are the mirrors of the soul.
fact is stranger than fi ction  Things 
that happen in real life are often far more 
unlikely than those dreamed up by writ-
ers: If the events of that day had been put 
forward as the plot of a TV drama, the idea 
would have been rejected as utterly implausible. 
But fact is stranger than fi ction. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1853 in T. C. 
Haliburton’s Sam Slick’s Wise Saws.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
truth is stranger than fiction.
facts are stubborn things  The truth 
cannot be disputed, disproved, or ignored: 
“‘Well, you get your money easy. . . . All 
you have to do is to sit there and hear les-
sons.’ I used to argue the matter at fi rst, 
but I’m wiser now. Facts are stubborn 
things, but as some one has wisely said, 
not half so stubborn as fallacies.” (Lucy 
Maud Montgomery, Anne of the Island, 
1915). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1732 in E. Budgell’s Liberty & Progress.
faint heart never won fair lady  It is 
necessary to be bold and courageous to 
win the heart of a woman—or to achieve 
any other cherished objective: “Of course 
there would be diffi culty. But was it not 
the business of his life to overcome dif-
fi culties? Had he not already overcome 
one diffi culty almost as great; and why 
should he be afraid of this other? Faint 
heart never won fair lady!” (Anthony Trol-
lope, Phineas Finn, 1869).The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
1545, but it is probably of ancient origin. 
The current form dates from 1614 or ear-
lier, and occurs in Gilbert and Sullivan’s 
comic opera Iolanthe (1882).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
none but the brave deserve the fair.
fair and softly goes far in a day  If you 
proceed with care, or at a gentle pace, 
you will achieve far more than if you 
rush; also used to recommend a tact-
ful approach when dealing with people: 
Don’t try to do too much too soon—remember 
the proverb, “Fair and softly goes far in a day.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1350 in 
Douce MS 52.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
slow and steady wins the race.
a fair exchange is no robbery  Exchang-
ing things of equivalent worth is a fair 
transaction; also used to justify taking 
something from somebody who has taken 
something from you: He gave me his leather 
jacket, which had a tear in the sleeve, and I 
f
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   84 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
85
gave him my CD player with its broken head-
phones—a fair exchange is no robbery! The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in 
John Heywood’s Dialogue of Proverbs.
fair feathers make fair fowl  See fine 
feathers make fine birds.
fair play’s a jewel  Sportsmanlike behav-
ior is of the utmost importance in any 
competitive situation: Let’s start again, and 
this time there’s to be no cheating. Fair play’s 
a jewel. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1809, in Washington Irving’s A History of 
New York, but with the implication that it 
was already in general use.
fair words butter no cabbage  See fine 
words butter no parsnips.
faith will move mountains  Nothing is 
impossible to those who have suffi cient 
faith; applied not only to religious faith, 
but to any strong belief in a cause or objec-
tive: She fi rmly believes that she can make him 
change his ways, and faith will move mountains, 
so she may yet succeed. The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “If ye have faith as a grain of 
mustard seed, ye shall say unto this moun-
tain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it 
shall remove; and nothing shall be impos-
sible unto you” (Matthew 17:20).
Variant of this proverb: faith can 
move mountains.
the falling out of lovers is the renewing 
of love  See the quarrel of lovers is 
the renewal of love.
familiarity breeds contempt  We tend 
to lose respect for people or things as we 
become better acquainted with them; also 
used in a wide range of other contexts, 
such as when somebody develops a dan-
gerously blasé approach to a task that has 
become routine: “. . . he sat himself down 
to ruminate upon his prospects, which, 
like the prospect outside his window, 
were suffi ciently confi ned and dingy. As 
they by no means improved on better 
acquaintance, and as familiarity breeds 
contempt, he resolved to banish them 
from his thoughts by dint of hard walk-
ing” (Charles Dickens, Nicholas Nickleby, 
1838–39). The proverb is of ancient 
origin, and has been traced back to the 
writings of Publilius Syrus (fi rst cen-
tury b.c.). The sentiment it expresses 
can be found in one of the fables of 
Aesop (sixth century b.c.), in which 
a fox gradually loses its fear of a lion. 
The facetious variant “Familiarity breeds 
contempt—and children” is attributed 
to Mark Twain.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
no man is a hero to his valet.
the family that prays together stays 
together  Families that share the same 
religious faith remain united: “Mother 
Teresa opined . . . ‘The family that prays 
together stays together; and if you stay 
together, you will love one another with 
the same love with which God loves each 
one of us’” (Washington Post, 1996). The 
proverb was coined in the 1940s as a slo-
gan of the Roman Catholic Family Rosary 
Crusade. In modern usage other words are 
sometimes substituted for prays—notably 
plays, encouraging families to engage in 
leisure activities together.
fancy passes beauty  It is more impor-
tant that a potential partner is likeable 
than good-looking: The duke’s friends were 
initially surprised at his choice of wife, who 
 fancy passes beauty
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   85 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
86
was far from the fi rst fl ush of youth, but 
fancy passes beauty. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1678 by John Ray in A Collec-
tion of English Proverbs.
far away the hills are green  See blue 
are the hills that are far away.
far-fetched and dear-bought is good 
for ladies  Women like expensive things 
from exotic places: Browsing through a cat-
alog of Christmas gifts that arrived in the mail 
this morning, it occurred to me that the old 
proverb “Far-fetched and dear-bought is good 
for ladies” still has some relevance in modern 
times. The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 
1350 in Douce MS 52.
the farthest way about is the nearest way 
home  See the longest way around is 
the shortest way home.
a fat kitchen makes a lean will  Those 
who eat well all their lives will have little 
money left when they die: Their lavish din-
ner parties were a legend in the neighborhood, 
but a fat kitchen makes a lean will, and nobody 
was surprised when the deplorable state of their 
fi nancial affairs came to light. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1948 in a U.S. prov-
erb collection.
Variant of this proverb: a fat kitchen 
makes a lean purse.
a fault confessed is half redressed  The 
act of confessing that you have done some-
thing wrong goes some way toward mak-
ing amends for your offense or error: “A 
fault confessed is half redressed, so I hope 
he will forgive us” (Peter O’Donnell, The 
Xanadu Talisman, 1981). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
in 1558.
faults are thick where love is thin  Peo-
ple are quick to fi nd faults in those they 
do not like: She had little good to say 
about her husband, but faults are thick where 
love is thin. This Welsh proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1616 by T. Draxe in Biblio-
theca Scholastica.
fear lends wings  Fear inspires extra 
speed in those attempting to escape what-
ever threatens them: “Therto fear gave 
her wings” (Edmund Spenser, The Faerie 
Queene, 1590). This French proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1580 by Philip 
Sidney in Arcadia.
fear the Greeks bearing gifts  See 
beware of greeks bearing gifts.
feed a cold and starve a fever  You should 
eat well when you have a cold but fast when 
you have a fever: “‘Forget about feeding 
a cold and starving a fever,’ Dr. Edelman 
said, adding there is no medical reason 
for diet changes” (Washington Times, 1997). 
The proverb is sometimes interpreted as a 
warning that eating well during a cold will 
bring on a fever, or if you feed a cold now 
you will have to starve a fever later. Other 
confl icting explanations interpret starve as 
“prevent” or even “die of.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1832, but fasting has 
been recommended as a remedy for fever 
since the 16th century or earlier.
Variant of this proverb: stuff a cold 
and starve a fever.
the female of the species is deadlier 
than the male  Women often prove to be 
more dangerous than men, when roused to 
anger; the proverb also is used literally in 
natural history contexts: The female of the 
species is deadlier than the male, and they don’t 
far away the hills are green
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   86 1/29/07   5:12:30 PM
87
come much deadlier than the mother who thinks 
her child has been wrongly accused. The prov-
erb comes from Rudyard Kipling’s poem 
The Female of the Species (1911): “When the 
Himalayan peasant meets the he-bear in his 
pride,/He shouts to scare the monster, who 
will often turn aside./But the she-bear thus 
accosted rends the peasant tooth and nail/
For the female of the species is more deadly 
than the male.” A jocular modern variant 
of the proverb reported among computer 
users runs: “The email of the species is 
more deadly than the mail.”
few words are best  It is best to com-
municate meaning in as few words as 
possible: “Wherefore, few words are 
best, wench” (Walter Scott, The Fair Maid 
of Perth, 1828). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1600 in Roxburghe Ballads.
fi elds have eyes and woods have ears 
There are very few places where you can 
do or say something without the risk of 
being seen or overheard: Although they 
were careful never to meet in public places, their 
affair did not remain a secret for long—fi elds 
have eyes and woods have ears. First recorded 
c. 1225, the proverb occurs in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
walls have ears.
fi ght fi re with fi re  The best way to deal 
with an opponent or an attack is to fi ght 
back with similar weapons or tactics: Fight 
fi re with fi re—if they resort to underhand 
methods to win over your customers, then you 
must not be afraid to do likewise. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1869, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of much 
earlier origin. Shakespeare’s play Coriola-
nus (4:7) contains the line “One fi re drives 
out one fi re,” and a 14th-century French 
proverb translates as “One fi re must put 
out another.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
like cures like.
fi nd a penny, pick it up, all day long you’ll 
have good luck  See see a pin and pick 
it up, all the day you’ll have good 
luck.
fi nders keepers, losers weepers  If you 
lose something and it is found by another, 
you have no right to reclaim it and must 
bear your loss as best you can: The boy 
found his sister’s missing watch and carried it 
off triumphantly to his room. “Finders keepers, 
losers weepers,” he jeered. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1825 in J. T. Brockett’s 
Glossary of North Country Words.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
finding is keeping.
fi nding is keeping  The person who 
fi nds something is entitled to keep it: In 
this country the principle of “fi nding is keep-
ing” is not enshrined in law, and whoever found 
and kept the missing money is no better than 
a thief. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1863 in John Hanning Speke’s Journal of 
the Discovery of the Source of the Nile.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
finders keepers, losers weepers.
fi ne feathers make fi ne birds  By dress-
ing in elegant or good-quality clothing, 
people create a favorable impression on 
others, often appearing to be of better 
breeding or higher class than they are: 
“Mrs. Joe . . . essayed to pick her to pieces, 
intimating that she was much indebted to 
her dress—that fi ne feathers made fi ne 
birds” (Robert Smith Surtees, Ask Mamma, 
 fi ne feathers make fi ne birds
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   87 1/29/07   5:12:31 PM
88
1858). Of French origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in the late 16th 
century. It is also used in the opposite form, 
“Fine feathers don’t make fi ne birds.”
Variant of this proverb: fair feathers 
make fair fowl.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
clothes make the man.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: clothes don’t make the man.
fi ne words butter no parsnips  Promises 
or compliments are pleasant to hear but 
serve no practical purpose unless they are 
backed up by action: “‘Ye speak reason-
ably, my lord,’ said Dalgetty, ‘and, ceteris 
paribus, I might be induced to see the mat-
ter in the same light. But, my lord, there 
is a southern proverb,—fi ne words butter 
no parsnips’” (Sir Walter Scott, A Legend 
of Montrose, 1819). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1639.
Variant of this proverb: fair words 
butter no cabbage.
fi ngers were made before forks  People 
ate with their hands before cutlery was 
invented; used as an excuse for picking up 
food with your fi ngers at table: After several 
attempts to spear an onion she gave up and 
removed one from the pot by hand. “Fingers were 
made before forks,” she said apologetically. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1567 in the 
form “God made hands before knives.” The 
current form occurs in Jonathan Swift’s 
Polite Conversation (1738): “Fingers were 
made before Forks, and Hands before 
Knives.”
Variant of this proverb: fi ngers were 
made before knives and forks.
fi re is a good servant but a bad master 
Fire is very useful when it is under con-
trol, but highly dangerous when it takes 
control: Many forest fi res are caused by some 
careless person who has dropped a match 
after lighting a cigarette, or failed to extin-
guish a campfi re, having forgotten—or never 
heard—the saying “Fire is a good servant but a 
bad master.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1615 in T. Adams’s England’s Sickness. 
Other words are sometimes substituted 
for fi re, such as money or alcohol.
Variant of this proverb: fi re and 
water are good servants but bad masters.
fi rst catch your hare  Do not act in 
anticipation of something that is yet to 
be achieved: “A modern cookery-book, 
in giving a recipe for cooking a hare, says, 
‘fi rst catch your hare, and then kill it’; a 
maxim of indisputable wisdom. The Chris-
tian chiefs on this occasion had not so much 
sagacity, for they began a violent dispute 
among themselves for the possession of a 
city which was still unconquered” (Charles 
MacKay, Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular 
Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, 1841). 
The proverb is popularly and erroneously 
believed to be the opening line of a recipe 
in an 18th- or 19th-century cookbook. It is 
actually of much earlier origin, and was fi rst 
recorded c. 1300 in Latin, with deer in place 
of hare: “vulgariter dicitur, quod primo opporte 
cervum capere [it is commonly said that one 
must fi rst catch the deer].”
Variant of this proverb: fi rst catch 
your rabbit and then make your stew.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t count your chickens before 
they are hatched.
fi rst come, fi rst served  Those who 
arrive or apply earliest are most likely to 
get what they want from a limited sup-
ply of things, such as tickets, discounted 
fi ne words butter no parsnips
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   88 1/29/07   5:12:31 PM
89
goods, or refreshments: “I have little 
doubt of procuring a remission for you, 
provided we can keep you out of the claws 
of justice till she has selected and gorged 
upon her victims; for in this, as in other 
cases, it will be according to the vulgar 
proverb, ‘First come, fi rst served’” (Sir 
Walter Scott, Waverly, 1814). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1548, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin. The 13th-century French proverb 
“qui ainçois vient au molin ainçois doit moldre 
[he who comes fi rst to the mill may grind 
fi rst]” recurs 100 years later in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390).
Variant of this proverb: fi rst there, 
fi rst served.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the early bird catches the worm.
the fi rst duty of a soldier is obedience 
No army can be an effi cient fi ghting force 
unless its members are prepared to obey 
orders without question: I was aware that 
this action would cause the death of hundreds 
of innocent civilians, but I had to follow the 
instructions of my commanding offi cer—the 
fi rst duty of a soldier is obedience. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1872, but earlier 
evidence suggests that it had long been in 
general use.
the fi rst hundred years are the hardest 
Life will always be diffi cult; said jocu-
larly or ironically to those who complain 
about their problems, sometimes with 
the implication that things will improve 
eventually: We had a rocky time during the 
early months of our marriage, and the only 
words of consolation I got from my mother were, 
“Don’t worry—the fi rst hundred years are the 
hardest!” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1928. Other periods may be substituted 
for hundred years, such as nine months (for a 
pregnant woman) or four years (for a col-
lege student).
fi rst impressions are the most lasting 
An initial opinion formed of somebody 
or something at the fi rst encounter lin-
gers in the mind and is diffi cult to efface: 
When approaching a potential new customer, 
whether in person, by phone or mail, or through 
advertising, always remember that fi rst impres-
sions are the most lasting. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in William Congreve’s play 
The Way of the World (1700) in the form 
“There is a great deal in the fi rst impres-
sion.”
the fi rst seven years are the hardest The 
fi rst stage in any enterprise is the hard-
est: “Never mind,” the older man said as he 
helped his young apprentice up from the fl oor, 
“the fi rst seven years are the hardest.” The 
origins of this proverb are obscure, but it 
probably made its fi rst appearance during 
World War I, when soldiers signed up 
for seven years’ service. It is commonly 
applied to marriage or new jobs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the first step is the hardest.
the fi rst step is the hardest  Making a 
start is often the most diffi cult part of an 
undertaking: If only I could pluck up cour-
age to speak to her, I know that the rest would 
be easy—the fi rst step is always the hardest. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1596 
in the form “The fi rst stretch [of a jour-
ney] is the worst.” It is popularly associ-
ated with the story that Saint Denis, 
patron saint of France, walked several 
miles with his head in his hands after 
being executed, and that on learning of 
this, a French noblewoman remarked, 
 the fi rst step is the hardest
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   89 1/29/07   5:12:31 PM
90
“Ce n’est que le premier pas qui coûte [It’s 
only the fi rst step that counts].”
Variant of this proverb: it’s the fi rst 
step that is diffi cult.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the first seven years are the 
hardest; a journey of a thousand 
miles begins with one step.
fi rst there, fi rst served  See first come, 
first served.
fi rst things fi rst  It is important to do 
things in the proper order, and not to omit 
a basic fi rst step: First things fi rst, before we 
come to look at the product’s new features, how 
much does it cost? The proverb comes from 
the title of a book published in 1894.
Variant of this proverb: put fi rst 
things fi rst.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t put the cart before the horse.
fi rst think, and then speak  See think 
before you speak.
fi rst thrive and then wive  It is sensible to 
get established in a career before getting 
married. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1608–09 by William Shakespeare in 
Pericles (5,2): “So he thriv’d that he is 
promis’d to be wiv’d to fair Marina.”
fi rst try and then trust  Before relying 
upon something (or someone), it is best 
to test it fi rst: The safest principle when it 
comes to old bridges is fi rst try and then trust. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 by 
J. Clarke in Paroemiographia Anglo-Latina.
Variant of this proverb: try before 
you trust.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
trust not one night’s ice.
the fi sh always stinks from the head 
downward  See a fish stinks from the 
head.
fi sh and guests stink after three 
days  Guests who stay for longer than 
three days risk becoming a burden or an 
irritation to their hosts: “How long should 
she stay? She remembered the universal 
truth that fi sh and guests smell after three 
days” (J. S. Borthwick, Down East Murders, 
1985). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1580, but the sentiment it expresses 
occurs in Miles Gloriosus by the Roman 
dramatist Plautus (c. 254–184 b.c.).
Variant of this proverb: fish and 
visitors smell in three days.
Proverbs expressing a similar mean-
ing: a constant guest is never wel-
come; short visits make long friends.
fi sh begin to stink at the head  See a 
fish stinks from the head.
fi sh or cut bait  The time has come to 
choose between two courses of action—
either get on with what you have to do, or 
go away and let somebody else do it: It’s 
fi sh or cut bait—if you’re not prepared to give 
this job the 100% commitment it requires, then 
clear your desk and make way for somebody 
who will. Of U.S. origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1876, in the record of a 
debate in the House of Representatives. 
The phrase cut bait means “stop fi shing.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
piss or get off the pot.
a fi sh stinks from the head  A corrupting 
infl uence often spreads from a leader to the 
rest of the organization or group: The moral 
decline in this country can be traced back to the 
questionable behavior of those in high offi ce—a 
fi rst there, fi rst served
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   90 1/29/07   5:12:31 PM
91
fi sh stinks from the head. First recorded in 
English in 1581, the proverb is of ancient 
origin. It refers to the fact that fi sh tend to 
rot from the head toward the tail.
Variants of this proverb: the fi sh 
always stinks from the head downward; 
fi sh begin to stink at the head.
fi sh where the fi sh are  If you want to 
obtain or achieve something, you must 
concentrate your efforts and attention 
on the places, people, or activities that 
are most likely to bring success: “Metro-
North and its agency . . . are putting a 
new twist on the marketing adage to 
‘fi sh where the fi sh are.’ The commuter 
railroad is sponsoring outdoor advertise-
ments, situated where it believes poten-
tial customers—frustrated drivers who 
might prefer taking the train—are sure to 
see it” (New York Times, 1992). The proverb 
is thought to be of recent origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
go hunting where the ducks are.
fl attery, like perfume, should be smelled 
but not swallowed  There is no harm 
in taking pleasure from fl attery, but do 
not make the mistake of believing it: He 
acknowledged the compliment with a gracious 
smile, but I could see that he was not going to let 
it affect his decision. Somebody had obviously 
told him that fl attery, like perfume, should be 
smelled but not swallowed. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1858 in H. W. Shaw’s Josh 
Billings’ Philosophy.
fl ing dirt enough, and some will 
stick  See throw dirt enough, and 
some will stick.
fl owers leave fragrance in the hand that 
bestows them  A person who gives usu-
ally derives some benefi t from the act 
of giving: “As artists fi nd joy in giving 
beauty to others, so anyone who masters 
the art of praising will fi nd that it blesses 
the giver as much as the receiver. There is 
truth in the saying, ‘Flowers leave part of 
their fragrance in the hand that bestows 
them’” (Reader’s Digest, 1991). The prov-
erb is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
food without hospitality is medicine  It 
is hard to enjoy refreshments that are 
offered with ill grace, or without friendly 
companionship: Although she arrived much 
later than expected and I was longing to go 
to bed, I stayed up to chat while she ate the 
sandwiches I had prepared for her. I know 
from experience that food without hospitality 
is medicine. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
a fool and his money are soon parted 
Foolish people are easily swindled or per-
suaded to waste their money: Thousands 
of people bought the expensive potion, which 
claimed to reverse the aging process, proving 
that a fool and his money are soon parted. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1587 in J. Bridges’s Defence of Government 
in Church of England.
a fool at forty is a fool indeed  People 
who have not gained the wisdom of expe-
rience by the time they reach middle age 
are likely to remain fools for the rest of 
their lives: You might expect a man of his 
age to have a bit more common sense, but I’ve 
given up hope of changing him now—a fool at 
forty is a fool indeed! The current form of 
the proverb comes from Edward Young’s 
The Universal Passion (1725): “Be wise with 
speed;/A fool at forty is a fool indeed,” 
 a fool at forty is a fool indeed
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   91 1/29/07   5:12:31 PM
92
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Variant of this proverb: A fool over 
forty is a fool indeed.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s no fool like an old fool.
a fool can ask more questions in an hour 
than a wise man can answer in seven 
years  See fools ask questions that 
wise men cannot answer.
a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin 
of little minds  A lack of fl exibility in 
making judgments is regarded as a sign 
of petty narrow-mindedness: “‘You can 
say consistency is the hobgoblin of small 
minds and accuse me of having a small 
mind; I’ll take it,’ he told reporters . . ., 
referring to his opposition to capital pun-
ishment and his support for tax cuts. ‘But 
I have been consistent. Maybe consistently 
wrong in your book. But consistent’” (New 
York Times, 1994). The proverb comes from 
Ralph Waldo Emerson’s essay “Self-Reli-
ance” (1841): “A foolish consistency is the 
hobgoblin of little minds, adored by little 
statesmen and philosophers and divines.”
Variant of this proverb: consistency 
is the hobgoblin of little minds.
a fool may give a wise man counsel 
People are often able to give good advice 
to those who are considered to be intel-
lectually superior; sometimes said apolo-
getically by the giver of such advice, or 
used as a warning against disregarding 
it: If a fool may give a wise man counsel, 
I would suggest you make further inquiries 
before signing the contract. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1641, but 
the sentiment it expresses is found in the 
romance Ywain and Gawain (c. 1350).
fool me once, shame on you; fool me 
twice, shame on me  Somebody who is 
taken in by a hoax or swindle on one occa-
sion may justifi ably blame the perpetrator, 
but those who fall victim a second time 
have only themselves to blame: I believed 
her story last time, to my cost, but I won’t be 
caught out if she tries the same trick again. As 
they say, “Fool me once, shame on you; fool me 
twice, shame on me.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded as recently as 1980, but with the 
implication that it was a well-established 
saying. It was probably originally used by 
children.
a fool over forty is a fool indeed  See a 
fool at forty is a fool indeed.
fools and children should never see half-
done work  You should not judge the 
quality of a piece of work until it is com-
plete, because it often appears unpromis-
ing in its unfi nished form; sometimes said 
in response to criticism, or as a reason for 
not letting such work be seen: “No stage of 
the manufacture was incredible by itself, 
but the result was incredible . . . authen-
ticating the adage that fools and children 
should never see anything till it is done” 
(Arnold Bennett, Anna of the Five Towns, 
1902). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1721 in James Kelly’s Scottish Proverbs.
fools ask questions that wise men can-
not answer  It is often better not to ask 
too many questions, or to avoid showing 
your ignorance; sometimes said to those 
who disregard this advice: I longed to ask 
him to translate what had just been said, but 
remembering the proverb “Fools ask questions 
that wise men cannot answer,” I decided to hold 
my tongue. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1666, in an Italian proverb collection.
a fool can ask more questions in an hour than a wise man can answer in seven years
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   92 1/29/07   5:12:32 PM
93
Variant of this proverb: a fool can 
ask more questions in an hour than a wise 
man can answer in seven years.
a fool’s bolt is soon shot  Foolish people 
act hastily and thus waste their efforts: 
“‘Your bolt is soon shot, according to 
the old proverb,’ said she” (Tobias Smol-
lett, Roderick Random, 1748). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1320 in Proverbs of 
Alfred. The allusion is to a crossbow bolt, 
which is likely to miss its target if fi red 
too quickly.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
hasty climbers have sudden falls.
fools build houses and wise men live in 
them  The cost of building property is 
such that those who build houses cannot 
afford to live in them, and have to sell 
them to recoup their losses; also applied 
to other things that are expensive to pro-
duce: They borrowed a huge sum of money to 
build their dream home, and were forced to sell 
it for a price that barely covered the interest 
on the loan, a classic illustration of the adage 
“Fools build houses and wise men live in them.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, in its 
variant form, in 1670.
Variant of this proverb: fools build 
houses and wise men buy them.
fools rush in where angels fear to 
tread  Foolish people often act reck-
lessly or impetuously in situations that 
others would approach with caution or 
avoid altogether: Fools rush in where angels 
fear to tread—he must be either very brave 
or very foolish to enter into negotiations with 
terrorists like these. The proverb comes 
from Alexander Pope’s Essay on Criticism 
(1711): “No place so Sacred from such 
Fops is barr’d, Nor is Paul’s Church more 
safe than Paul’s Church-yard: Nay, fl y to 
Altars; there they’ll talk you dead; For 
Fools rush in where Angels fear to tread.”
footprints on the sands of time are not 
made by sitting down  People who idle 
their lives away will not make a lasting 
impression on history or be remembered 
for their great achievements; used as a 
spur to action and industry: Her motto was 
“Footprints on the sands of time are not made by 
sitting down,” and her energy and commitment 
to the cause was an example to us all. The 
phrase footprints on the sands of time comes 
from Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s 
poem A Psalm of Life (1839): “Lives of great 
men all remind us/We can make our lives 
sublime,/And, departing, leave behind 
us/Footprints on the sands of time.”
forbidden fruit is sweet  Things that you 
must not have or do are always the most 
desirable: “There are many portals forbid-
den to me, as there are many forbidden 
to all men; and forbidden fruit, they say, 
is sweet; but my lips have watered after no 
other fruit but that which grows so high, 
within the sweep of that great police-
man’s truncheon” (Anthony Trollope, Can 
You Forgive Her?, 1864). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390). The 
phrase forbidden fruit alludes to the fruit of 
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil 
in the Garden of Eden, which Adam and 
Eve were forbidden to eat.
Variants of this proverb: forbidden 
fruit is the sweetest; stolen fruit is sweet.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
stolen water is sweet.
forewarned is forearmed  Advance 
warning of something gives you the 
 forewarned is forearmed
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   93 1/29/07   5:12:32 PM
94
opportunity to prepare for it: “‘You 
think,’ continued Max, smiling at God-
det’s speech, ‘that I intend to marry Flore 
when Père Rouget dies, and so this sister 
and her son, of whom I hear to-night for 
the fi rst time, will endanger my future?’ 
‘That’s just it,’ cried François. . . . ‘Well, 
don’t be uneasy, friends,’ answered Max. 
‘Forewarned is forearmed!’” (Honoré de 
Balzac, Two Brothers, 1843). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English, with differ-
ent wording c. 1425. Compare the Latin 
saying “praemonitus, praemunitus [fore-
warned, forearmed].”
to forget a wrong is the best revenge  See 
the best way to get even is to forget.
forgive and forget  Do not bear 
grudges—forgive those who have wronged 
you and forget the wrong: “He spoke sud-
denly, as if concluding a discussion. ‘The 
best thing for us is to forget all this.’ She 
started a little and shut the fan with a click. 
‘Yes, forgive—and forget,’ he repeated, as if 
to himself ” (Joseph Conrad, Tales of Unrest, 
1898). The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 
1377 in William Langland’s Piers Plowman. It 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play King Lear (4:7) 
in the form “forget and forgive.”
Variant of this proverb: good to for-
give, best to forget.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let bygones be bygones.
fortune favors fools  Foolish people 
often have good luck, or succeed by 
chance: “. . . fortune favours fools and his 
very stupidity served him well at the end” 
(Eden Phillpotts, Red Redmaynes, 1922). 
Of Latin origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1546 in the form 
“God sends fortune to fools.”
fortune favors the brave  Those who 
act boldly or courageously are most likely 
to succeed: They say that fortune favors the 
brave, and I hope they are right, because it’s too 
late to turn back now! Of ancient origin, the 
proverb occurs in Virgil’s Aeneid (fi rst cen-
tury b.c.): “audentes fortuna iuvat [fortune 
aids the bold].”
Variant of this proverb: fortune 
favors the bold.
for want of a nail the shoe was lost, 
for want of a shoe the horse was lost, 
and for want of a horse the rider was 
lost  Do not neglect minor details that 
seem insignifi cant in themselves: We must 
check and double-check everything—even the 
smallest error or omission may have disastrous 
consequences. Remember the proverb “For want 
of a nail the shoe was lost, for want of a shoe 
the horse was lost, and for want of a horse the 
rider was lost.” First recorded in this form in 
George Herbert’s Outlandish Proverbs (1640) 
the proverb may be of French origin.
Variant of this proverb: for want of a 
nail the kingdom was lost.
four eyes see more than two  Two peo-
ple keeping watch, supervising, or search-
ing have a better chance of noticing or 
fi nding something: I’ve read the essay over, 
but I’d be grateful if you would have a look at 
it too, in case I’ve missed any errors—four eyes 
see more than two. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, in its variant form, in 1591.
Variant of this proverb: two eyes see 
more than one.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
two heads are better than one.
the fox preys furthest from his hole 
Criminals and other persons engaged in 
illicit activity operate away from their 
to forget a wrong is the best revenge
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   94 1/29/07   5:12:32 PM
95
home territory, where they may be rec-
ognized: In robbing the local newsagent he 
ignored the old saw that the fox preys furthest 
from his hole. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1629 in the Sermons of T. Adams.
Friday’s child is loving and giving  Chil-
dren born on a Friday are supposed to 
have an affectionate, generous nature: My 
mother tells me that my cantankerous, miserly 
uncle was born on Good Friday, which disproves 
the saying “Friday’s child is loving and giving.” 
The proverb is the fi fth line of a traditional 
rhyme beginning “Monday’s child is fair of 
face.” See entries at the days of the week 
for other proverbs from this rhyme.
a friend in need is a friend indeed  True 
friends are those who stand by you in 
times of hardship: “You came to my side 
when I was in trouble. . . . A friend in 
need is a friend indeed” (Charles Reade, 
Griffi th Gaunt, 1866). First recorded in 
this form in 1678, the proverb is of 
ancient origin: compare Euripides (fi fth 
century b.c.), “in adversity good friends 
are most clearly seen” and Ennius (c. 
239–169 b.c.), “a sure friend is known in 
unsure times.”
a friend to all is a friend to none  A per-
son who tries to be friends with everyone 
will end up being friends with no one. 
FRENCH PROVERBS
The French are renowned for their love of life and in particular that of food and wine. The 
French stock of proverbs includes many that deal with the good things that life has to offer.
A day is lost if one has not laughed
The best herbs are in the smallest bags
The best soup is made of old meat
Eat with pleasure, drink with measure
The friends of our friends are our friends
A good meal ought to begin with hunger
He who has much, wants more
It is only the fi rst bottle that is expensive
Life is an onion that you peel crying
A living dog is better than a dead lion
No saint was ever popular in his own parish
Nothing dries so fast as tears
Patience is bitter but its fruits are sweet
Ridicule kills
Tasty is the chicken that is fed by someone else
There are more old drunkards than old doctors
We are all a long time dead
Where love sets the table food tastes at its best
Where the hostess is beautiful the wine is delicious
Young saints, old devils
ååååå a friend to all is a friend to none
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   95 1/29/07   5:12:32 PM
96
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in 1623 in Wodroephe’s Spares Houres, 
but is of much older origin and is usually 
attributed to Aristotle.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t be all things to all men.
from nothing, nothing is made  See 
nothing comes of nothing.
from shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves is only 
three generations  A family may pass 
from poverty to wealth in one genera-
tion, through effort and enterprise, but 
return from wealth to poverty in the next 
generation, through extravagance or bad 
management: The youngest child of poor 
parents, he taught himself to read and write 
and built up a thriving manufacturing business, 
which has just gone bankrupt in the hands of 
his son—yet another illustration of the proverb 
“From shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves is only three 
generations.” The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
in its variant form, in 1871, and is said to 
have originated in Lancashire, an industrial 
county of England. Its current form has 
also been attributed to the U.S. industrial-
ist Andrew Carnegie (1835–1919).
Variant of this proverb: from clogs to 
clogs is only three generations.
from the day you were born till you ride 
in a hearse, there’s nothing so bad but it 
might have been worse  See nothing 
so bad but it might have been worse.
from the mouths of babes come words 
of wisdom  See out of the mouths 
of babes and sucklings come great 
truths.
from the sublime to the ridiculous is 
only one step  Somebody or something 
that commands great respect or admira-
tion can very quickly become the object 
of scorn or derision: “They also raised 
such foolish questions as, whether God 
might not have become an ass or a cucum-
ber as well as a man, and what effect the 
sacrament would have upon a dog or a 
mouse. From reverence to profanity, as 
from the sublime to the ridiculous, there 
is only one step” (Philip Schaff, History 
of the Christian Church, 1883–1893). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1795 in Tom 
Paine’s The Age of Reason: “The sublime 
and the ridiculous are often so nearly 
related that it is diffi cult to class them 
separately. One step above the sublime 
makes the ridiculous; and one step above 
the ridiculous makes the sublime again.” 
In its current more concise form, the 
proverb is usually attributed to Napoleon 
Bonaparte, referring to his retreat from 
Moscow in 1812. It has given rise to the 
cliché from the sublime to the ridiculous, used 
with reference to any sudden transition or 
sharp contrast between the grand and the 
contemptible.
Variant of this proverb: from the 
sublime to the ridiculous is but a step.
from the sweetest wine, the tartest vine-
gar  Great love may turn to the intense 
hatred; also used of other changes of feel-
ing or nature from one extreme to the 
other: She loved him blindly and passionately 
for a time, but from the sweetest wine comes the 
tartest vinegar, and now she swears she would 
dance on his grave. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1578.
Variant of this proverb: the sweetest 
wine makes the sharpest vinegar.
full cup, steady hand  Those who enjoy 
great power, wealth, or happiness must 
from nothing, nothing is made
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   96 1/29/07   5:12:32 PM
97
behave with caution to avoid losing what 
they have: “Poor things! They were so 
happy—so open-hearted. I did long to cau-
tion them. ‘Full cup, steady hand’” (Char-
lotte M. Yonge, The Monthly Packet, 1889). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1025.
Variant of this proverb: a full cup 
needs a steady hand.
the future ain’t what it used to be  In 
modern times people are less optimistic 
than they were in the past; also used more 
generally when making adverse compari-
sons with the past: I remember leaving col-
lege full of expectations and ambition, but my 
daughter has a far more downbeat—and per-
haps more realistic—view of her prospects. As 
they say, “The future ain’t what it used to be.” 
The proverb is of uncertain origin, having 
been attributed to the baseball player Yogi 
Berra (1925–  ) and the writer Arthur 
C. Clarke (1917–  ), among others.
 the future ain’t what it used to be
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   97 1/29/07   5:12:32 PM
ååå   å
98
gambling is getting nothing for some-
thing  Gambling is not a wise use of 
money, as you are very likely to receive 
no return whatsoever for your fi nancial 
outlay: The saying “Gambling is getting 
nothing for something” may be disproved 
by a few lucky winners, but its truth is 
acknowledged by the majority of the popula-
tion—who carry on squandering their money 
on lottery tickets regardless. The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
the game is not worth the candle  It 
is not worth persisting in an enterprise 
that is unlikely to yield enough profi t or 
benefi t to compensate for the effort or 
expense involved, or that carries a risk 
of actual harm or loss: “‘Your brain may, 
as you say, be roused and excited, but 
it is a pathological and morbid process 
which involves increased tissue-change 
and may at least leave a permanent 
weakness. . . . Surely the game is hardly 
worth the candle. Why should you, for 
a mere passing pleasure, risk the loss of 
those great powers with which you have 
been endowed?’” (Sir Arthur Conan 
Doyle, The Sign of Four, 1890). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in the writings of 
the French essayist Michel de Montaigne 
(1533–92).
garbage in, garbage out  A person or 
machine provided with inferior source 
material, faulty instructions, or erroneous 
information can produce only poor-qual-
ity work or rubbish: The poor quality of 
the teaching at the school is refl ected in the 
examination results, which are way below the 
national average. As they say in computing, 
“Garbage in, garbage out.” First recorded in 
1964, the proverb originally referred to 
computer input and output, and is still 
used in that context, often in the form of 
the acronym GIGO.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t make a silk purse out of a 
sow’s ear.
gasoline and whiskey don’t mix  See 
whiskey and gasoline don’t mix.
gather ye rosebuds while ye may  Live 
life to the full while you are still young 
enough to enjoy it: My friends thought I 
was crazy to give up my job and sell my home 
to join the round-the-world voyage, but my 
motto is “Gather ye rosebuds while ye may.” 
The current form of the proverb comes 
from Robert Herrick’s poem “To the 
Virgins, to Make Much of Time” (1648), 
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin. In 1578 the French poet Pierre 
de Ronsard wrote, “Gather the roses of 
g
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   98 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
99
life today,” and Edmund Spenser’s The 
Faerie Queene (1590) contains the lines, 
“Gather therefore the Rose, whilst yet is 
prime,/For soon comes age, that will her 
pride defl ower.”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomor-
row we die; seize the day.
genius is an infi nite capacity for taking 
pains  What appears to be a product 
of superior intellectual power is often 
simply the result of great assiduity and 
meticulous attention to detail: “Finally, 
he examined with his glass the word 
upon the wall, going over every letter of 
it with the most minute exactness. This 
done, he appeared to be satisfi ed, for 
he replaced his tape and his glass in his 
pocket. ‘They say that genius is an infi nite 
capacity for taking pains,’ he remarked 
with a smile. ‘It’s a very bad defi nition, 
but it does apply to detective work’” (Sir 
Arthur Conan Doyle, A Study in Scarlet, 
1887). The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in 1858, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin. 
The comte de Buffon (1707–88) is said to 
have remarked, “Le génie n’est qu’une plus 
grande aptitude à la patience [Genius is only 
a greater aptitude for patience].”
genius is one percent inspiration and 
ninety-nine percent perspiration  Great 
achievements or innovations require some 
intellectual input but are largely due to 
hard work: She received numerous awards for 
her work, and was hailed as one of the great-
est minds of her generation, but in newspaper 
interviews she always remained modest, quoting 
the proverb “Genius is one percent inspira-
tion and ninety-nine percent perspiration.” 
The proverb is traditionally attributed 
to the U.S. inventor Thomas Alva Edison 
(1847–1931).
Variant of this proverb: genius is ten 
percent inspiration and ninety percent 
perspiration.
genius without education is like silver in 
the mine  Superior intellectual power is 
a wasted resource unless it is nurtured by 
education: The school was set up to feed the 
minds of exceptionally gifted students, on the 
principle that genius without education is like 
silver in the mine.
a gentleman’s word is his bond  See a 
man’s word is as good as his bond.
gently does it  See easy does it.
give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it 
to death  People who suddenly acquire 
wealth or power are likely to misuse it: 
Give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it to 
death—within six months he had squandered 
all his winnings, and had to go cap in hand 
to his former employer to ask for his old job 
back. The proverb was fi rst recorded, with 
different wording, in 1576. It occurs in 
Shakespeare’s play Henry VI, Part 3 (1:4): 
“Unless the adage must be verifi ed,/
That beggars mounted run their horse 
to death.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
set a beggar on horseback, and he’ll 
ride to the devil.
give a civil answer to a civil question 
See a civil question deserves a civil 
answer.
give a dog a bad name and hang him 
Once somebody’s reputation has been 
damaged—for example, by rumor or 
 give a dog a bad name and hang him
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   99 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
100
slander—it will never recover: “The Lib-
eral impulse is almost always to give a 
dog a bad name and hang him: that is, 
to denounce the menaced proprietors 
as enemies of mankind, and ruin them 
in a transport of virtuous indignation” 
(George Bernard Shaw, The Intelligent 
Woman’s Guide to Socialism, 1928). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, in 1706.
Variant of this proverb: he that has an 
ill name is half hanged.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: he that would hang his dog gives 
out first that he is mad; throw dirt 
enough, and some will stick.
give a loaf and beg a slice  People who 
are too generous risk having to beg them-
selves: Her generosity was such that it was a 
case of give a loaf and beg a slice herself. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1678 by 
John Ray in A Collection of English Proverbs. 
Sometimes found with slice replaced by 
GERMAN PROVERBS
German proverbs include many wise warnings against the perils of daily existence. These 
range from self-deception and physical temptation to the hazards of love.
Beauty is the eye’s food but the soul’s sorrow
Begged bread has a hard crust
Better a good hanging than a bad marriage
Birds of prey do not sing
Boredom is the father of all sins
Don’t throw away your old shoes until you have a new pair
Even the devil’s grandmother was a nice girl when she was young
Fire in the heart sends smoke to the head
He who does not punish evil invites it
He who has no enemies has no friends either
He who has not tasted bitter things, knows not what sweet is
Howling makes the wolf bigger than he really is
High climbers and deep swimmers never grow old
A lie becomes true when one believes it
More people drown in glasses than in rivers
Never give advice unless asked
Never tickle the nose of a sleeping bear
No bed is big enough to hold three
The silent dog is the fi rst to bite
Time is anger’s medicine
Two is an army against one
What little Hans did not learn, big Hans does not know
When an old man marries, death laughs
Where there is no jealousy there is no love
ååååågive a loaf and beg a slice
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   100 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
101
the archaic word shive, meaning the same 
thing.
give a man a fi sh and you feed him for 
a day; show him how to fi sh and you 
feed him for a lifetime  Many of the 
problems of the needy are better solved 
by education than by charitable handouts: 
Our organization believes in the principle that 
if you give a man a fi sh, you feed him for a day, 
whereas if you show him how to fi sh, you feed 
him for a lifetime. In projects all over the Third 
World, our volunteers are actively involved in 
teaching local people the skills they need to 
farm their land more effi ciently. The proverb 
is of ancient Chinese origin.
give a man an inch and he’ll take a 
mile  People are inclined to take exces-
sive advantage of the tolerance or gener-
osity of others; often used to warn against 
making even the smallest concession: He 
came to us once for an evening meal and now 
he expects us to put up his wife and children 
for three weeks! Talk about giving him an inch 
and he’ll take a mile! The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546 in the form “When I 
gave you an inch you took an ell.” An ell 
is an obsolete measure of length, vary-
ing according to locality: in England it is 
approximately 45 inches, in Scotland, 37 
inches.
Variants of this proverb: give a man 
an inch and he’ll take an ell; an inch is as 
good as a mile.
give a man enough rope and he’ll hang 
himself  People who are given complete 
freedom of action will ultimately bring 
about their own downfall, for example by 
inadvertently revealing their guilt: Rather 
than accuse her without any fi rm evidence, I 
suggest we let things take their course. Give a 
man enough rope and he’ll hang himself—
sooner or later we’ll catch her red-handed. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 in 
Thomas Fuller’s Holy War.
give and take is fair play  Exchanging 
like for like—whether it be a blow, an 
insult, a favor, or a pardon—is a fair and 
legitimate way to proceed: “Give and take 
is fair play. All I say is, let it be a fair stand-
up fi ght” (Captain Marryat, Newton Forster, 
1832). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1778, in Fanny Burney’s novel Evelina, 
in the form “Give and Take is fair in all 
nations.” It is also used with give and take 
in the sense of “mutual concession or 
compromise.” 
give a thing, and take a thing, to wear 
the devil’s gold ring  It is wrong to 
take back a gift: He subsequently regretted 
his generosity, and asked his sister to return the 
CD. “Give a thing, and take a thing, to wear the 
devil’s gold ring,” came her reply. Mainly used 
by children, the proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1571, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
ancient origin. Compare Plato (c. 428–348 
b.c.), “as with children, there is no taking 
away of what has been rightly given.”
give credit where credit is due  Do not 
neglect to give people the praise they 
deserve, or to acknowledge the good 
things they do; often used when such 
credit is given grudgingly: “Yes, yes! let us 
be tenderly conscientious in giving credit 
where credit is due; let us never for-
get that the citizen Maurice contributed 
something to the cure of the interesting 
invalid, as well as the victuals and drink 
from the Piebald Horse” (Wilkie Collins, 
After Dark, 1856). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1777, in the form “May honor 
 give credit where credit is due
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   101 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
102
be given to whom honor may be due.” It 
may be of biblical origin: “Render there-
fore to all their dues . . . honour to whom 
honour” (Romans 13:7). The word credit 
replaced honor in the 19th century.
give me a child for the fi rst seven years 
and he is mine for life  A child’s future 
is determined by what it learns in its fi rst 
seven years: The emperor watched the child 
leave and murmured to his secretary “give me 
a child for the fi rst seven years and he is mine 
for life.” The proverb was recorded in 
1902–04 by V. S. Lean in Collecteana but is 
much older, being particularly associated 
with Saint Ignatius Loyola, the founder of 
the Jesuits in the 16th century.
Variant of this proverb: give me a 
child for the fi rst seven years, and you may 
do what you like with him afterwards.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the child is the father of the man.
give the devil his due  People deserve 
recognition for their skills and contribu-
tions even if they are otherwise unworthy 
or unlikable: I can’t stand the man, on a 
purely personal level, but—give the devil his 
due—he has done a fantastic job in getting the 
company back on its feet. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1589 in John Lyly’s Pappe 
with an Hatchet.
the glass is either half empty or half 
full  Many situations can be viewed neg-
atively or positively—a negative thinker 
with half a glass of beer would say that 
the glass was half empty, whereas a posi-
tive thinker would say it was half full: 
Some employees equate redundancy with being 
thrown on the scrap heap, others see it as a 
golden opportunity for a change of career—the 
glass is either half empty or half full.
Variant of this proverb: the opti-
mist’s cup is half full; the pessimist’s cup 
is half empty.
gluttony kills more than the sword 
Overeating, or overindulgence in the 
wrong kind of food, may lead to an early 
death: Whenever he was offered a second help-
ing, my grandfather would shake his head and 
say, “Gluttony kills more than the sword.” I was 
often tempted to ask him how many people 
actually died by the sword in this day and age. 
The proverb dates from before 1384 in 
John Wycliffe’s Works.
go abroad and you’ll hear news of 
home  People often remain ignorant 
of matters concerning their family and 
friends, or events in their own neighbor-
hood, until they go traveling, when they 
hear about them at second hand: “What is 
the meaning of this silly story that people 
are circulating about Thomasin and Mr. 
Wildeve? . . . It is said that one should 
go abroad to hear news of home, and I 
appear to have done it” (Thomas Hardy, 
Return of the Native, 1878). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in 1678.
God fi ts the back to the burden  See 
god makes the back to the burden.
God helps those who help them-
selves  Those who are self-reliant and 
make an effort are more likely to get 
what they want than those who sit back 
and wait for divine assistance: “I wish 
you all success, Paul, and I thank you 
for wishing me to share in your good 
fortune. God helps those who help them-
selves, and he will help you if you only 
deserve it” (Horatio Alger, Paul Prescott’s 
give me a child for the fi rst seven years and he is mine for life
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   102 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
103
Charge, 1865). The proverb is of ancient 
origin. It is sometimes used facetiously 
as a justifi cation for stealing, or in the 
extended form “God helps those who 
help themselves, but God help those who 
are caught helping themselves.”
Variants of this proverb: God helps 
them that help themselves; heaven helps 
those who help themselves.
God is always on the side of the big 
battalions  See providence is always 
on the side of the big battalions.
God is in the details  See the devil is in 
the details.
God made the country and man made 
the town  The urban environment, con-
structed by human hands, is inferior to 
the natural countryside, which is the 
work of divine creation: “The miserable 
routinists who keep repeating invidiously 
Cowper’s ‘God made the country and 
man made the town,’ as if the town were 
a place to kill out the race in, do not know 
what they are talking about” (Oliver Wen-
dell Holmes, Elsie Venner, 1861). In its 
current form, the proverb comes from 
William Cowper’s poem The Task (1785). 
The sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
ancient origin: in the fi rst century b.c. the 
Roman scholar Varro wrote, “divina natura 
dedit agros, ars humana aedifi cavit urbes 
[divine nature gave us the fi elds, human 
art built the cities].”
God makes the back to the burden  No-
body has to endure more than his or her 
body or spirit can bear; used to imply that 
the strongest are destined to suffer the 
greatest adversity, or that at times of great 
adversity we are given extra strength: She 
certainly seems to have had more than her fair 
share of grief in recent years—more than most 
of us could stand—but God makes the back to 
the burden, as they say. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1822.
Variant of this proverb: God fi ts the 
back to the burden.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
god tempers the wind to the shorn 
lamb.
God moves in mysterious ways  Strange 
or unpleasant things that happen are meant 
to be, and often turn out for the best: 
God moves in a mysterious way, and Jenkins’s 
knee injury, which everybody thought would 
spell disaster for the team, had the opposite 
effect—his replacement scored a record number 
of goals, giving the team its best season ever. 
The proverb comes from William Cow-
per’s hymn “Light Shining Out of Dark-
ness” (1779): “God moves in a mysterious 
way/His wonders to perform;/He plants 
his footsteps in the sea/And rides upon 
the storm.”
Variant of this proverb: the Lord 
moves in mysterious ways.
God never sends mouths but he sends 
meat  God can be relied upon to pro-
vide for everybody: “God never sends 
mouths . . . but he sends meat, and any 
man who has sense enough to be honest, 
will never want wit to know how to live” 
(John Pendleton Kennedy, Swallow Barn, 
1832). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1546.
Variant of this proverb: God never 
sends a mouth but he feeds it.
God protect me from my friends—I can 
protect myself from my enemies  See 
save us from our friends.
 God protect me from my friends—I can protect myself from my enemies
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   103 1/29/07   5:12:33 PM
104
God sends meat, but the devil sends 
cooks  Good food can be ruined by a 
bad cook: The brochure for the hotel boasted 
that only the best local produce was used in 
its kitchens, but our fi rst meal there was a big 
disappointment. “God sends meat, but the devil 
sends cooks,” remarked my wife. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1542 (A. Borde, 
Dietary of Health), but with the implication 
that it was already in general use.
God’s in his heaven; all’s right with the 
world  All is well at this moment in time; 
used as a general expression of happiness 
or contentment: “Let us then resolutely 
turn our backs on the once-born and 
their sky-blue optimistic gospel; let us not 
simply cry out, in spite of all appearances, 
‘Hurrah for the Universe!—God’s in his 
Heaven, all’s right with the world’” (Wil-
liam James, Varieties of Religious Experience, 
1902). In its current form, the proverb 
comes from Robert Browning’s poem 
“Pippa Passes” (1841). It replaces an ear-
lier proverb, “God is where he was,” fi rst 
recorded in 1530 and used to console or 
encourage those in trouble or despair.
the gods send nuts to those who have no 
teeth  Opportunities or good fortune 
often come too late in life for people to 
enjoy them or take full advantage of them; 
also applied more generally to people of 
any age who are unable to use or benefi t 
from good things that come their way: The 
gods send nuts to those who have no teeth—if 
only I had won a holiday like this while I was 
still young and fi t enough to make the most of 
it! The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1929 
in the periodical American Speech.
God takes soonest those he loves best 
God’s favorites die young, because he 
longs to have them by his side again; 
often said in consolation, for example to 
bereaved parents: God takes soonest those he 
loves best, and little Bethany, who brought such 
happiness to so many people in the fi ve short 
years of her life, lost her battle with leukemia 
yesterday.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: whom the gods love die young; 
the good die young.
God tempers the wind to the shorn 
lamb  Weak or vulnerable people have 
divine protection from the worst mis-
fortunes; also used when such people are 
treated with compassion by their fellow 
human beings: “There is an unduly opti-
mistic proverb which declares that God 
tempers the wind to the shorn lamb. My 
subsequent history was hardly to justify 
such naive faith in the Deity” (Vera Brit-
tain, Testament of Youth, 1933). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1594 in the French 
form “Dieu mesure le froid à la brebis tondue 
[God measures the cold to the shorn 
sheep].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
god makes the back to the burden.
go farther and fare worse  If you reject 
something acceptable in the hope of fi nd-
ing something better, you may end up 
having to settle for something worse: 
“She’s just as rich as most of the girls who 
came out of India. I might go farther and 
fare worse” (William Makepeace Thac-
keray, Vanity Fair, 1848). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546.
go hunting where the ducks are  If you 
want to fi nd or accomplish something, 
you must go to the right places, make 
contact with the right people, and do the 
God sends meat, but the devil sends cooks
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   104 1/29/07   5:12:34 PM
105
right things: “The cold facts of 1988 do 
suggest that if in 1992 the Democrats—in 
Barry Goldwater’s phrase—are to ‘go 
hunting where the ducks are,’ the most 
ducks are likely to be found outside of 
Dixie” (New York Times, 1991).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
fish where the fish are.
the golden age was never the present 
age  The past and the future always seem 
infi nitely preferable to the present time: 
People have fond memories of the past and 
great hopes for the future, forgetting that today 
is yesterday’s future and tomorrow’s past—the 
golden age was never the present age. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1732 in 
Thomas Fuller’s Gnomologia: Adagies and 
Proverbs.
a golden key can open any door  With 
money you can gain access to anything 
you want; used specifi cally of bribery, or 
more generally of the power and infl u-
ence of wealth: “Their better-educated 
neighbours . . . did not call on the newly 
rich family. That was before the days when 
a golden key could open any door” (Flora 
Thompson, Lark Rise to Candleford, 1945). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1580, 
in John Lyly’s Euphues and his England: 
“Who is so ignorant that knoweth not, 
gold be a key for every locke.”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
a bribe will enter without knock-
ing; money is power; money talks.
gold may be bought too dear  Wealth 
is not worth having if there is too great 
a risk or sacrifi ce involved in acquiring 
it: Gold may be bought too dear, and in his 
ruthless pursuit of fi nancial gain he has lost 
most of his friends, destroyed his marriage, 
and damaged his health. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in John Heywood’s 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
good Americans, when they die, go to 
Paris  Paris is regarded as a kind of 
paradise by certain Americans, especially 
the literati, many of whom have taken 
up residence there over the years: If it 
is true that good Americans, when they die, 
go to Paris, then they must not expect to have 
the city to themselves—the French capital has 
become a mecca for tourists from all nations. 
The proverb was coined by the poet and 
artist Thomas Gold Appleton (1812–84) 
and recorded in Oliver Wendell Holmes’s 
The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table (1858). 
It occurs in Oscar Wilde’s play A Woman 
of No Importance (1894), followed by the 
observation that “when bad Americans die 
. . . they go to America.”
a good beginning is half the battle  If 
you make a good start to a project or 
enterprise, you are halfway to making a 
success of it: We were very pleased to have 
made such excellent progress on the fi rst day—a 
good beginning is half the battle. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in Oliver Goldsmith’s 
play She Stoops to Conquer (1773) in the 
form “The fi rst blow is half the battle.” 
The sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
much earlier origin. In modern times it is 
most frequently encountered in the form 
of the cliché half the battle.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
well begun is half done.
a good beginning makes a good ending 
Something that is well planned and well 
executed from the start is likely to end 
in success: A good beginning makes a good 
ending, and if you don’t measure out the 
 a good beginning makes a good ending
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   105 1/29/07   5:12:34 PM
106
ingredients accurately your loaf may be a 
disaster. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1300.
good company on the road is the short-
est cut  A journey seems much shorter 
when you have pleasant people to talk to 
along the way: My friends went with me to 
the station, and what is usually a long and 
tedious walk seemed to be over in no time at 
all. As they say, “Good company on the road 
is the shortest cut.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1653, in Izaak Walton’s The 
Compleat Angler.
Variant of this proverb: cheerful 
company shortens the miles.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
he travels fastest who travels alone.
the good die young  It often seems that 
good people are more likely to meet a pre-
mature death than bad people; also used 
to console those who have lost a young 
friend or relative: “The good do die young. 
That’s why people like you and me are left 
to grow old” (James Leasor, Love and the 
Land Beyond, 1979). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1697 in Daniel Defoe’s Char-
acter of the Late Dr. S. Annesley: “The best of 
men cannot suspend their fate;/The good 
die early, and the bad die late.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
whom the gods love die young.
a good dog deserves a good bone  A 
loyal servant or employee deserves his 
reward: “A good dog deserves, sir, a good 
bone” (Ben Jonson, A Tale of a Tub, 1633). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1611 
by Randle Cotgrave in A Dictionary of the 
French and English Tongues.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the laborer is worthy of his hire.
a good example is the best sermon  It 
is better to show people how to behave 
by setting a good example instead of just 
telling them: The priest was famous locally 
for his active role in the community and clearly 
believed that a good example was the best 
sermon. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1732 by Thomas Fuller in Gnomologia.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
example is better than precept.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: do as i say, not as i do.
a good face is a letter of recommen-
dation  An honest demeanor may be 
interpreted as a sign of a person’s integ-
rity: “His honest countenance was a good 
letter of recommendation” (Tobias Smol-
lett, Humphrey Clinker, 1771). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English in 1620 by T. 
Shelton in his translation of Don Quixote, 
but is much older and appeared in the 
writings of Publius Syrus.
good fences make good neighbors  A 
good relationship between neighbors 
depends on each respecting the other’s 
privacy and not entering his or her prop-
erty uninvited; also used more broadly 
of international relations and the need 
to maintain trade barriers and border 
controls: The saying “Good fences make good 
neighbors” is equally relevant in the work-
place, and you should make every effort not to 
encroach on a colleague’s personal space. First 
recorded in 1640, in the form “A good 
fence helps to keep peace between neigh-
bors,” the proverb is often associated with 
Robert Frost, who used it in his poem 
“Mending Wall” (1914).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a hedge between keeps friendship 
green.
good company on the road is the shortest cut
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   106 1/29/07   5:12:34 PM
107
good health is more to be desired than 
wealth  See health is wealth.
a good horse cannot be of a bad color 
Superfi cial appearances do not affect 
the essential worth of something: “It is 
observed by some, that there is no good 
horse of a bad colour” (Isaac Walton, The 
Compleat Angler, 1653). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1628 by J. Carmichaell in 
Proverbs in Scots.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: appearances are deceiving; judge 
not according to appearances.
a good husband makes a good wife  A 
husband who treats his family with respect, 
and carries out his duties as he should, 
will fi nd that his wife does likewise: He 
complains if his shirts aren’t ironed, or if the 
dinner’s late, but when I ask him to do some-
thing around the house he always manages to put 
it off. I told him, “A good husband makes a good 
wife.” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1492 in Salomon & Marcolphus.
Variant of this proverb: a bad hus-
band makes a bad wife.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good jack makes a good jill.
the good is the enemy of the best  If 
you are content with producing what is 
merely good you will never achieve excel-
lence: In this company we believe that the 
good is the enemy of the best—our products are 
not just of an acceptable standard, they are of 
the highest possible quality. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1912, but with the impli-
cation that it was already in general use.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth 
doing well.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
the best is the enemy of the good.
a good Jack makes a good Jill  People 
who live or work together should set a 
good example to each other—a good 
husband will have a good wife, a good 
master will have a good servant, and so 
on: You cannot expect your secretary to be 
punctual if you are regularly late for work—a 
good Jack makes a good Jill. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1623 in William Painter’s 
Palace of Pleasure.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good husband makes a good wife.
a good leader is also a good follower 
Those best suited to leadership are those 
who have shown a willingness to follow 
the commands of others: Before you cast 
your vote, remember that a good leader is also 
a good follower, and consider the way that 
the candidates have behaved in their previous 
roles. The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that cannot obey cannot com-
mand.
good men are scarce  It is often diffi cult 
to fi nd a talented or suitably qualifi ed 
person when you need one; also used 
literally as a comment on the dearth of 
decent people—or eligible bachelors in 
the modern world: He’s an excellent worker, 
and we’re anxious not to lose him—good men 
are scarce. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1609 in D. Tuvill’s Essays Moral and 
Theological.
Variant of this proverb: a good man 
is hard to fi nd.
a good name is better than precious 
ointment  Your good name should be 
your most cherished possession: “Let 
me tell you something straight from the 
 a good name is better than precious ointment
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   107 1/29/07   5:12:34 PM
108
shoulder: good name in man or woman 
is the immediate jewel of their soul. A 
good name is better than precious oint-
ment” (Joseph Heller, God Knows, 1984). 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “A good 
name is better than precious ointment; 
and the day of death than the day of one’s 
birth” (Ecclesiastes 7:1). The words pre-
cious ointment are sometimes replaced by 
precious stones, fi ne jewels, rubies, great riches, 
or gold.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good reputation is more valuable 
than money.
a good name is sooner lost than won  It 
takes a lot of time and effort to earn a 
good name for yourself, but you can lose it 
in an instant with a single foolish act: Think 
carefully before you get involved in anything 
that is not strictly legal—remember that a good 
name is sooner lost than won. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1727 in John Gay’s 
“Fox at Point of Death,” in Fables.
a good reputation is more valuable than 
money  A good reputation is worth more 
than anything else: It is reassuring to learn 
that are still a few incorruptible individuals 
in public offi ce, who are aware that a good 
reputation is more valuable than money. The 
proverb is of ancient origin, and has been 
traced back to the writings of Publilius 
Syrus (fi rst century b.c.).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good name is better than precious 
ointment.
good riddance to bad rubbish  We are 
better off without worthless people or 
things; usually said on the departure of 
such a person or the loss of such a thing: 
“‘I have been in this house waiting on 
my young lady a dozen year and I won’t 
stop in it one hour under notice from a 
person owning to the name of Pipchin 
trust me, Mrs P.’ ‘A good riddance of bad 
rubbish!’ said that wrathful old lady. ‘Get 
along with you, or I’ll have you carried 
out!’” (Charles Dickens, Dombey and Son, 
1847–48). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1771 in Essex Gazette.
the good seaman is known in bad weather 
Those who are truly able or skillful prove 
their worth at times of crisis or when 
major problems are encountered; also 
used literally with specifi c application to 
sailing: She seems competent enough, but she 
has not yet been put to the test—a good sea-
man is known in bad weather. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1767 in Papers of 
Benjamin Franklin.
good seed makes a good crop  The 
quality of a product depends on the qual-
ity of the raw materials or ingredients: 
“Seed-time’s pretty sure to come around 
. . . And good seed makes a good crop” 
(Laura Ingalls Wilder, The Long Winter, 
1940). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1569 in the form “Of good seed proceeds 
good corn,” with reference to parents and 
their offspring.
a good tale is not the worse for being 
told twice  There is no harm in telling a 
good joke or anecdote—or a story with a 
moral—a second time; often used by way 
of apology or justifi cation for such repeti-
tion: You may have heard this story before, but 
a good tale is not the worse for being told twice. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1577 in 
the form “A good tale may be twice told.” 
In the 18th century it was used when grace 
was accidentally said twice before a meal.
a good name is sooner lost than won
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   108 1/29/07   5:12:34 PM
109
the good that men do lives after 
them  People are remembered after 
their deaths for the good things that they 
did during their lives: He was a tyrannical 
ruler, and had many innocent people put to 
death, but he was also a great patron of the arts, 
and the good that men do lives after them—he 
has gone down in history as one of the founders 
of modern civilization. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1942, but the sen-
timent it expresses is found in the writings 
of Euripides (fi fth century b.c.): “When 
good men die their goodness does not 
perish,/But lives though they are gone.” 
The opposite sentiment is expressed in 
Shakespeare’s play Julius Caesar (3:2), “The 
evil that men do lives after them, /The 
good is oft interred with their bones.”
good things come in small packages 
See the best things come in small 
packages.
good to forgive, best to forget  See for-
give and forget.
good wine needs no bush  A good prod-
uct does not need advertising: In the com-
petitive marketplace of the modern world, few 
companies are prepared to trust the wisdom of 
the age-old proverb, “Good wine needs no bush.” 
Of ancient origin, the proverb occurs in 
the epilogue of Shakespeare’s play As You 
Like It: “If it be true that good wine needs 
no bush, ’tis true that a good play needs 
no epilogue.” The word bush refers to a 
bunch of ivy that was formerly hung out-
side a wine merchant’s premises.
a goose quill is more dangerous than a 
lion’s claw  Written words of criticism 
or defamation can do more harm or cause 
more pain than a physical attack: The color 
drained from her face as she read the letter, 
with its vile accusations, and she collapsed 
before she reached the end—a goose quill is 
indeed more dangerous than a lion’s claw.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the pen is mightier than the sword.
gossip is the lifeblood of society  Social 
intercourse thrives on gossip—if people 
stopped talking about each other they might 
stop talking to each other: Gossip is the life-
blood of society—how dull our parties would be 
if we were driven to discussing politics or sport all 
the time. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1941 in David Kent’s Jason Burr’s First Case.
gossip is vice enjoyed vicariously  Peo-
ple feel they can innocently participate 
in the illicit pleasures of other people’s 
immoral behavior by talking about it 
with their friends or reading about it in 
the newspaper: They say that gossip is vice 
enjoyed vicariously, and women who would 
never dream of being unfaithful to their hus-
bands always seem eager to hear about those 
who are. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1904 in E. Hubbard, The Philistine.
governments have long arms  See kings 
have long arms.
grace will last, beauty will blast  A good 
character will outlive superfi cial physical 
attractiveness: She may be the more beautiful 
of the two sisters, but remember how the old 
adage goes, “grace will last, beauty will blast.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1450 in 
Proverbis of Wysdom.
Variant of this proverb: grace will 
last, favor will blast.
grasp no more than the hand will 
hold  Do not be greedy or  overambitious: 
 grasp no more than the hand will hold
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   109 1/29/07   5:12:35 PM
110
People who ignore the proverb “Grasp no more 
than the hand will hold” often end up losing 
everything they have in an attempt to gain 
just a little more. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1732 in Thomas Fuller’s Gno-
mologia: Adagies and Proverbs.
the grass is always greener on the other 
side of the fence  A different place, situ-
ation, job, or lifestyle always seems more 
attractive or appealing than your own: She 
is one of those people for whom the grass is always 
greener on the other side of the fence, and who are 
never satisfi ed with what they have if they think 
their friends have something better. In its cur-
rent form the proverb is of relatively recent 
origin, but the sentiment it expresses dates 
back to ancient times. Compare Ovid (43 
b.c.–a.d. 18): “fertilior seges est alienis semper 
in agris [the harvest is always more fruitful 
in another man’s fi elds].”
Variant of this proverb: the grass is 
always greener in somebody else’s back-
yard.
the gray mare is the better horse  A 
woman is often more competent or pow-
erful than a man; used specifi cally of 
wives who have the upper hand over their 
husbands: “She did not wish it to seem, 
to quote an old fashioned expression, 
that the grey mare was the better horse. 
. . . She strove to avoid prejudicing her 
husband’s position” (Violet Powell, Flora 
Annie Steel, 1981). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1529.
great boats may venture more, but little 
boats should keep near shore  See lit-
tle boats should stay close to shore.
a great book is a great evil  A long book 
is a bad book—good writers know how 
to express themselves concisely: “If there 
is any truth in the old Greek maxim that a 
large book is a great evil, English diction-
aries have been steadily growing worse 
ever since their inception more than three 
centuries ago” (Oxford English Dictionary, 
Preface, 1933). The proverb originated 
in the writings of the poet Callimachus 
(third century b.c.).
a great city, a great solitude  People 
often feel more lonely in a large city, among 
thousands of strangers, than they would 
do if they were actually alone: It was on the 
crowded streets of Los Angeles that I learned the 
meaning of the proverb “A great city, a great soli-
tude,” and I longed to be back in my cozy apart-
ment, with just the television for company. The 
proverb is of ancient Greek origin.
great cry but little wool  See much cry 
and little wool.
the greater the truth, the greater the 
libel  Some people will take greater 
offense at a true accusation of wrong-
doing than at a false one: The vehemence 
with which he denied any involvement in the 
scandal aroused my suspicions—the greater 
the truth, the greater the libel. The proverb 
is associated with the English judge Lord 
Mansfi eld (1705–93).
great men have great faults  Remarkable 
people tend to have serious character fl aws: 
“Great men’s faults are never small” (John 
Clarke, Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina, 1639). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1616 by 
T. Draxe in his Bibliotheca Scholastica.
great minds think alike  People often say 
or do the same thing, or make the same 
decision, coincidentally; said when such a 
the grass is always greener on the other side of the fence
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   110 1/29/07   5:12:35 PM
111
coincidence occurs, with no more than a 
jocular reference to the size of the intel-
lect: “I was planning to buy them an espresso 
machine.” “So was I. Great minds think alike!” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1618. In 
early occurrences it had the form “Great 
minds [or wits] jump,” the word jump being 
used in the now archaic sense of “agree.”
Variant of this proverb: great minds 
run in the same channels.
great oaks from little acorns grow 
Things of great size or importance may 
develop from a relatively small or insig-
nifi cant beginning: “A curfew, I admit, 
is not the end of civilization, nor even 
a steep imposition. But mighty oaks, as 
they say, from little acorns grow” (Wash-
ington Times, 1995). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1385, in Chaucer’s Troilus 
and Criseyde. The word great is sometimes 
replaced by big, mighty, tall, or some other 
synonym.
great trees keep down little ones  The 
predominance of a particular person, 
company, nation, etc., results in lesser 
rivals being kept in the shade: In the 
GREEK PROVERBS
Many Greek proverbs are of ancient origin, but most remain as relevant today as when fi rst 
coined. In particular, the Greeks have many proverbs offering guidance in the conduct of 
personal relationships, both with friends and enemies.
Don’t forget to distrust
Greeks only agree with each other about going to the toilet
The heart that loves is always young
He who eats and drinks with the rich leaves the table hungry
He who thinks the worst usually is right
He who wants to be happy must stay at home
Listen to that which is well said, even if it from the mouth of an enemy
My donkey is dead; let no more grass grow
An old enemy never becomes a friend
Observe your enemies, for they fi rst fi nd your faults
One minute of patience can mean ten years of peace
One word spoken in anger may spoil an entire life
The people make the town
Remorse is worse than a beating
Success has many friends
Time is the soul of the world
Under every stone sleeps a scorpion
Where there is a sea there are pirates
Whoever feeds the wolf in the winter will be eaten by him in the spring
Women are as changeable as the sea
ååååå
 great trees keep down little ones
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   111 1/29/07   5:12:35 PM
112
competitive world of politics it is a sad but 
unavoidable fact that great trees keep down 
little ones. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1642 by Thomas Fuller in The Holy State 
and the Profane State.
a green winter makes a fat churchyard 
More deaths occur during mild winters 
than they do in cold winters: Scientists 
agree that “a green winter makes a fat church-
yard,” as milder winters encourage the develop-
ment of a variety of epidemics. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1635 by J. Swan in 
Speculum Mundi.
Variant of this proverb: a green Yule 
makes a fat churchyard.
a growing youth has a wolf in his 
stomach  Adolescent boys are perpetu-
ally hungry: I’d better fi ll up the freezer—a 
growing youth has a wolf in his stomach, and 
my teenage son has invited three of his friends 
for the weekend! The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1611 in Randle Cotgrave’s A 
Dictionary of the French and English Tongues.
Variant of this proverb: A growing 
youth has a wolf in his belly.
a guilty conscience needs no accuser 
People who know they have done wrong 
reveal their guilt by the things they say 
or the way they interpret what other 
people say: “Then I knew he was speaking 
of Hinckman’s murder and must be the 
murderer—‘a guilty conscience needs no 
accuser.’” (Ellery Queen’s Mystery Magazine, 
1952). The proverb was fi rst recorded in its 
current form in 1744, but a similar senti-
ment was expressed in a proverb recorded 
by Dionysius Cato (fourth century a.d.): 
“the man with something on his conscience 
thinks he is always the subject of talk.”
a green winter makes a fat churchyard
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   112 1/29/07   5:12:35 PM
ååå   å
113
the habit does not make the monk  See 
the cowl does not make the monk.
the hair of the dog is good for the 
bite  See take a hair of the dog that 
bit you.
half a loaf is better than no bread  We 
must be grateful for what we get, even 
if it is less than we desire—it is better to 
have a small amount than nothing at all: I 
was disappointed not to fi nd all the information 
I required, but half a loaf is better than no bread, 
and at least I have enough to start writing my 
article. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1546.
Variants of this proverb: half a loaf is 
better than none; half an egg is better than 
an empty shell. 
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
something is better than nothing.
the half is better than the whole  A 
restrained approach to something is often 
the most effective; used to warn against 
excess: “It is true of conversation as of many 
other things, that the half is better than the 
whole. People who are fond of talking 
ought to beware of being lengthy” (A. C. 
Benson, From a College Window, 1906). The 
proverb comes from the Greek poet Hes-
iod’s Works and Days (eighth century b.c.) 
“The half is greater than the whole.” It was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1550.
Variant of this proverb: half is more 
than the whole.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
less is more.
half the truth is often a whole lie  Not 
telling the whole truth, or saying something 
that is only partly true, is tantamount to 
lying: What she said was not entirely untrue, but 
she omitted to mention a number of signifi cant 
details, and half the truth is often a whole lie. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in Benjamin 
Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack (1758) in 
the form “Half the truth is often a great lie.” 
It occurs in Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s poem 
The Grandmother (1847): That a lie which is 
half a truth is ever the blackest of lies,/That 
a lie which is all a lie may be met and fought 
with outright,/ But a lie which is part a 
truth is a harder matter to fi ght.”
Variant of this proverb: a half-truth is 
often a great lie.
half the world knows not how the other 
half lives  See one half of the world 
doesn’t know how the other half 
lives.
handsome is as handsome does  People 
should be valued for their good deeds, 
h
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   113 1/29/07   5:12:35 PM
114
not their good looks; also occasionally 
used of things, or as a warning not to be 
misled by an attractive appearance: “‘Such 
a handsome young man.’ ‘Handsome is as 
handsome does. Much too fond of poking 
fun at people’” (Agatha Christie, A Murder 
Is Announced, 1950). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1659, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of much earlier 
origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the tree is known by its fruit.
the hand that rocks the cradle rules the 
world  Mothers have a powerful infl u-
ence—if indirectly—on world affairs, 
because it is they who mold the char-
acters of future leaders: “The habits of 
the home in one generation become the 
morals of society in the next. As the 
old adage says: ‘The hand that rocks the 
cradle rules the world’” (Washington Times, 
1996). The proverb comes from William 
Ross Wallace’s poem “What Rules the 
World” (1865).
hanging and wiving go by destiny  Some 
people are fated to marry each other, just 
as some are fated to be hanged: Hanging 
and wiving go by destiny, and if I am meant to 
have him, then he will be mine! The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1546, and occurs in 
Shakespeare’s play The Merchant of Venice 
(2:9): “The ancient saying is no heresy:/
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
marriages are made in heaven.
happy is he that is happy in his children 
Parents derive much pleasure from their 
children, if they happen to be happy and 
well-behaved: The bishop patted the infant 
on the head and murmured wistfully “happy 
is he that is happy in his children.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1732 in 
Thomas Fuller’s Gnomologia.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: children are certain cares, but 
uncertain comforts.
happy is the bride that the sun shines 
on  According to popular superstition, a 
woman who has a sunny wedding day will 
have a happy marriage: “Monday came, a 
cloudless lovely day . . . the clerk ascend-
ing the church steps, quoted the old 
proverb to the pew-opener, meeting him 
under the porch: ‘Happy is the bride on 
whom the sun shines!’” (Wilkie Collins, 
No Name, 1862). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in Robert Herrick’s Hesperides 
(1648) in the form “Blest is the Bride, on 
whom the Sun doth shine.”
Variants of this proverb: blessed is the 
bride that the sun shines on; happy is- 
the bride that the sun shines on, blessed is 
the corpse that the rain falls on; happy 
is the bride that the sun shines on, sorry 
is-the bride that the rain rains on.
happy is the country that has no history 
It is a happy or fortunate country that 
has no unpleasant events worth record-
ing in its past: “Quoting the familiar 
dictum: ‘Happy is the country which has 
no history,’ I remarked that I belonged 
. . . to a generation which was still on 
the early side of middle age but had 
already seen almost more history than 
any generation could bear” (Vera Brittain, 
Testament of Experience, 1957). The proverb 
has been attributed to the French philoso-
pher Montesquieu (1689–1755) in the 
form “Happy the people whose annals are 
blank in history-books!” A similar senti-
ment occurs in Benjamin Franklin’s Poor 
the hand that rocks the cradle rules the world
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   114 1/29/07   5:12:35 PM
115
Richard’s Almanack (1740): “Happy that 
nation, fortunate that age, whose history 
is not diverting.”
happy’s the wooing that’s not long a-
doing  It is best to have only a short 
period of courtship before marriage: Hap-
py’s the wooing that’s not long a-doing, says the 
proverb, but many couples who marry in haste 
soon discover that it is not a recipe for wedded 
bliss. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1576 in Parade of Devil’s Devices.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: marry in haste, repent at leisure.
hard cases make bad law  Cases that are 
complex or diffi cult to decide often cause 
the true meaning of the law to be distorted 
or obscured and sometimes lead to what 
is perceived as a miscarriage of justice: 
The saying “Hard cases make bad law” should 
never be used to vindicate incompetent members 
of the legal profession. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1854 by G. Hayes in W. S. 
Holdsworth’s History of English Law (1926).
the harder the storm, the sooner it’s 
over  See the sharper the storm, the 
sooner it’s over.
hard words break no bones  Adverse 
criticism or verbal abuse may be unpleas-
ant, but it does no physical harm: She 
called me every name under the sun, and told 
me never to go near any member of her family 
again, but hard words break no bones. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1697 in G. 
Meriton’s Yorkshire Ale.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
sticks and stones may break my bones, 
but words will never hurt me.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
the tongue is not steel, but it cuts.
hard work never hurt anybody  See 
work never hurt anybody.
haste is from the devil  Never be 
tempted to act in haste—you are bound 
to regret it: “Listening patiently to the 
views . . . he knew that for an Intelligence 
offi cer ‘haste is from the devil’” (Lon-
don Times, 1929). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1633, and may have origi-
nated in Eastern Europe or Asia.
haste makes waste  By acting too hast-
ily or doing things too hurriedly you risk 
causing damage or making mistakes that 
subsequently have to be put right, result-
ing in a loss of time, money, and materi-
als: Haste makes waste—I broke at least four 
of the glasses in my rush to get them washed 
and dried before the guests started arriving. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1546 by John Heywood in his 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: haste makes 
waste, and waste makes want, and want 
makes strife between a good man and 
his wife.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the hasty bitch bringeth forth blind 
whelps.
the hasty bitch bringeth forth blind 
whelps  Things done in haste tend to 
produce poor results: The foreman had 
forgotten the age-old warning that “the hasty 
bitch bringeth forth blind whelps.” The prov-
erb appeared in R. Robinson’s 1556 trans-
lation of Thomas More’s Utopia but is of 
much older origin, being quoted by Livy, 
Aristotle, and Galen. The word whelps 
may sometimes be replaced by puppies.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
haste makes waste.
 the hasty bitch bringeth forth blind whelps
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   115 1/29/07   5:12:36 PM
116
hasty climbers have sudden falls  Un-
duly rapid progress in a person’s career, 
or in some other sphere of activity, often 
leads to an abrupt and ignominious down-
fall or failure: The speed with which he rose 
through the ranks caused his parents some 
concern, for hasty climbers have sudden falls. 
The proverb dates from before 1439 in J. 
Lydgate’s Fall of Princes.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a fool’s bolt is soon shot.
hawks will not pick out hawks’ eyes 
People who belong to the same group will 
not—or should not—harm one another: 
“I have heard that hawks should not pick 
out hawks’ eyes. What do you propose to 
gain?” (John Buchan, Salute to Adventurers, 
1915). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1573 in the form “One crow never pulls 
out another’s eyes.”
Variant of this proverb: a crow 
doesn’t pick out the eye of another crow.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: dog does not eat dog; there’s 
honor among thieves.
heads I win, tails you lose  In some 
situations it is impossible for one person 
not to be a winner—or impossible for 
another person not to be a loser—what-
ever the outcome: It’s heads I win, tails you 
lose—if they keep me on they’ll have to start 
paying me the going rate, and if they don’t, I’ll 
sue them for wrongful dismissal. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1846 by John Wilson 
Croker in The Croker Papers.
health is not valued till sickness 
comes  People often fail to appreci-
ate the good situation that they are in 
until circumstances change for the worse: 
Health is not valued till sickness comes—he 
took his home comforts for granted until his 
family’s fortunes changed, and he found himself 
begging on the streets. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1553 in the form “Health 
after sickness is sweeter evermore.”
health is wealth  Good health is a valu-
able asset, worth more than any amount 
of money: Remember that health is wealth, 
and there’s no point in working yourself into an 
early grave just so that you can afford a better 
house or a bigger car. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in the 16th century.
Variant of this proverb: good health 
is more to be desired than wealth.
hear all, see all, say nowt  It is sometimes 
prudent to listen and watch carefully, but 
say nothing: She remembered her grandmoth-
er’s advice to hear all, see all, say nowt. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1400 in 
Proverbs of Wisdom. A fuller version of the 
proverb runs “hear all, see all, say nowt, 
tak’ all, keep all, gie nowt, and if tha ever 
does owt for nowt do it for thysen.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
keep your mouth shut and your eyes 
open.
heated arguments do not warm the fi re-
side  See the only thing a heated 
argument ever produced is coolness.
heaven helps those who help them-
selves  See god helps those who help 
themselves.
heaven protects children, sailors, and 
drunken men  Certain types of people 
seem to enjoy divine protection; said 
when a child, sailor, or other person has 
a miraculous escape from injury or death: 
“Heaven, they say, protects children, sail-
hasty climbers have sudden falls
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   116 1/29/07   5:12:36 PM
117
ors, and drunken men; and whatever 
answers to Heaven in the academical sys-
tem protects freshmen” (Thomas Hughes, 
Tom Brown at Oxford, 1861). The quotation 
is the fi rst recorded use of the proverb.
a heavy purse makes a light heart  Those 
who have plenty of money are happy and 
carefree: If only I could sell another of my 
paintings, all our troubles would be over—a 
heavy purse makes a light heart. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1521 in A. Barclay’s 
Eclogues.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a light purse makes a heavy heart.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: money can’t buy happiness; much 
coin, much care.
he comes too early who brings bad 
news  People are never in a hurry to 
hear bad news: I knew they would be less 
pleased to see me when they heard what I had 
to say to them—he comes too early who brings 
bad news.
Variant of this proverb: bad news 
always comes too soon.
a hedge between keeps friendship 
green  It is advisable not to become 
too intimate with friends or neighbors, 
and to respect each other’s privacy, if you 
want to maintain a good relationship with 
them: We meet up for coffee once a month, 
and phone each other now and then, but most 
of the time we just get on with living our own 
lives—a hedge between keeps friendship green. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1707 in 
John Mapletoft’s Select Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: a hedge 
between keeps fellowship green.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
good fences make good neighbors.
he gives twice who gives quickly  A 
prompt response to a request for some-
thing, such as money or help, is of greater 
value than a more generous offering 
given late: “‘He gives twice who gives 
quickly.’ . . . We have everything to gain 
by generous action at once” (London Times, 
1980). Of ancient origin, the proverb is 
sometimes quoted in its Latin form, “Bis 
dat qui cito dat.” Other words, such as 
promptly or happily, may be substituted 
for quickly.
he laughs best who laughs last  See he 
who laughs last, laughs longest.
he lives long who lives well  Provided 
that you live a good life, its actual length 
is of no signifi cance, whereas a bad life is 
worthless and wasted; also interpreted 
literally, with the implication that living 
well will extend your life span: “He liveth 
long who liveth well!/All other life is short 
and vain” (Horatio Bonar, Hymns of Faith 
and Hope, 1861). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1553 in the form “They lived 
long enough, that have lived well enough.”
Variant of this proverb: he lives lon-
gest who lives best.
hell hath no fury like a woman 
scorned  A woman who is rejected by 
the man she loves has an immense capac-
ity for ferocious or malicious revenge: 
Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned—he 
arrived home from his so-called business trip 
to fi nd that his jealous wife had burned all his 
books, poured his vintage wine over the garden, 
smashed his computer, and emptied their joint 
account to buy herself a new wardrobe and a 
one-way ticket to her sister’s in England. In 
its current form, the proverb comes from 
William Congreve’s play The Mourning 
 hell hath no fury like a woman scorned
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   117 1/29/07   5:12:36 PM
118
Bride (1697): “Heav’n has no rage, like 
love to hatred turn’d;/Nor Hell a fury, 
like a woman scorn’d.” The sentiment it 
expresses, however, is of ancient origin: 
compare Euripides (fi fth century b.c.), “a 
woman . . . when she has been wronged 
in a matter of sex, there is no other 
heart more bloodthirsty.” The proverb 
is also applied to other situations where 
somebody—not necessarily a woman—is 
treated with disrespect or contempt, as 
in “Hell hath no fury like a rock star 
scorned.”
Variant of this proverb: hell knows 
no wrath like a woman scorned.
hell is full of good meanings, but heaven 
is full of good works  See the road to 
hell is paved with good intentions.
help you to salt, help you to sorrow 
According to popular superstition, it is 
unlucky to add salt to another person’s 
food at table: “No one would at table 
spoon salt on to another person’s plate, 
for ‘Help you to salt, help you to sor-
row’” (Flora Thompson, Lark Rise to Can-
dleford, 1945). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection.
he must have a long spoon who sups 
with the devil  See he who sups with 
the devil should have a long spoon.
he that cannot obey cannot command 
Those who are unwilling or unable to 
obey orders are not fi t to hold a position 
of leadership or authority: His insubordi-
nate behavior made him an unlikely candidate 
for promotion—his superiors were fi rmly of the 
belief that he who cannot obey cannot com-
mand. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1734, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin. Compare 
Seneca (c. 4 b.c.–a.d. 65), “nemo regere 
potest nisi qui et regi [nobody can rule 
unless he can also be ruled].”
Variant of this proverb: by learning to 
obey, you will know how to command.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good leader is also a good fol-
lower.
he that complies against his will is of 
his own opinion still  By forcing some-
body to do something, or to admit that 
something is true, you have not actually 
succeeded in changing that person’s mind: 
They tried to brainwash me into believing that 
terrorism was the only possible course of action, 
and I knew that my life depended on at least 
pretending to agree with them, but he that com-
plies against his will is of his own opinion still. 
The proverb comes from Samuel Butler’s 
poem Hudibras (1680): “He that complies 
against his will,/Is of his own opinion 
still;/Which he may adhere to, yet dis-
own,/For reasons to himself best known.”
he that drinks beer, thinks beer  Drink-
ing alcohol affects the way you think and 
the way you behave; often used with spe-
cifi c reference to the effects of drinking 
beer as opposed to other alcoholic liquor: 
He that drinks beer, thinks beer, and by the end 
of the fi fth pint our conversation had begun 
to deteriorate accordingly. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1820 in W. Irving’s Sketch 
Book of Geoffrey Crayon.
he that goes a-borrowing, goes a-
sorrowing  Borrowing inevitably leads 
to trouble, as when you fi nd yourself 
unable to repay a loan; also used to 
hell is full of good meanings, but heaven is full of good works
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   118 1/29/07   5:12:36 PM
119
imply that those who try to borrow 
from others will be disappointed: “Who 
goes a-borrowing goes a-sorrowing. Yes, 
the balanced-budget amendment is sort 
of a dumb idea, because it can so eas-
ily be evaded by cunning congressional 
accounting” (American Spectator, 1995). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1545, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: borrowing 
brings sorrowing.
he that has a choice has trouble  Mak-
ing a choice is fraught with diffi cul-
ties—not only do you risk making the 
wrong decision, but you may also offend 
somebody by what you reject: The saying 
“He that has a choice has trouble” is never more 
true than when you are faced with two equally 
undesirable alternatives.
he that has a full purse never wanted 
a friend  Wealthy people never lack 
friends—or those who claim to be their 
friends until their money runs out: I 
soon discovered that he who has a full purse 
never wanted a friend, and there were plenty 
of people who were only too anxious to help 
me, once they knew that they would be amply 
rewarded for their efforts.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a rich man’s joke is always funny; 
wealth makes many friends.
he that has an ill name is half hanged 
See give a dog a bad name and hang 
him.
he that has a wife and children has given 
hostages to fortune  Family responsi-
bilities can hold a man back in life, for 
example by discouraging him from taking 
risks: It was a tempting opportunity, and one 
that I would have seized with both hands in 
my bachelor days, but he that has a wife and 
children has given hostages to fortune—if the 
venture failed, all our lives would be ruined. In 
its current form, the proverb comes from 
Francis Bacon’s essay “Of Marriage and 
Single Life” (1612): “He that hath wife and 
children hath given hostages to fortune; 
for they are impediments to great enter-
prises, either of virtue or mischief.” A 
similar sentiment, however, occurs in the 
writings of the Roman poet Lucan (a.d. 
39–65): “Coniunx est mihi, sunt nati: dedimus 
tot pignora fatis [I have a wife, I have sons: 
all of them hostages given to fate].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he travels fastest that travels alone.
he that is born to be hanged shall 
never be drowned  See if you’re born 
to be hanged, then you’ll never be 
drowned.
he that is down need fear no fall  Those 
in lowly positions, or who have already 
fallen from lofty positions, have no need 
to worry about failure: I had already lost 
everything I valued—my job, my marriage, 
my self-respect—so I was prepared to take the 
risk. He that is down need fear no fall. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in Richard 
Taverner’s Proverbs (1539).
he that is too secure is not safe  Beware 
of complacency—you must remain alert 
and watchful if you want to avoid danger: 
The old proverb “He that is too secure is not safe” 
has been quoted by critics of the modern trend 
toward increasingly sophisticated home-security 
systems and car-safety devices. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1732, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin.
 he that is too secure is not safe
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   119 1/29/07   5:12:36 PM
120
Variant of this proverb: the way to be 
safe is never to feel secure.
he that lives in hope dances to an ill 
tune  It is unwise to let your future 
happiness or well-being depend on 
expectations that may not be realized: 
She talked excitedly of the bright prospects 
that lay ahead of her if she passed the audi-
tion, but he that lives in hope dances to an ill 
tune, and I was afraid that she was heading 
for a major disappointment. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1591, in John 
Florio’s Second Fruits, in the form “He 
that dooth liue in hope, dooth dance in 
narrowe scope.”
Variant of this proverb: he that lives 
in hope dances without music.
he that lives on hope will die fasting  Do 
not pin all your hopes on something you 
may not attain, because you could end up 
with nothing: It’s no good just hoping that 
business will improve—he that lives on hope 
will die fasting, and you must take action now, 
by going out and fi nding some new customers. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1616 in 
the form “Hope will make a man neither 
eat nor drink.”
Variant of this proverb: he that lives 
on hope has a slender diet.
he that repairs not a part, builds all  See 
who repairs not his gutters repairs his 
whole house.
he that touches pitch shall be defi led  If 
you get involved with wicked people 
or illegal activities, you cannot avoid 
becoming corrupted yourself: I would 
advise you to steer clear of these people and 
their dubious affairs, if you want to maintain 
your spotless reputation—he that touches 
pitch shall be defi led. The proverb comes 
from the Apocrypha: “He that toucheth 
pitch shall be defi led therewith” (Eccle-
siasticus 13:1).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you lie down with dogs, you’ll get 
up with fleas.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the sun loses nothing by shining 
into a puddle.
he that waits for dead men’s shoes may 
go a long time barefoot  See it’s ill 
waiting for dead men’s shoes.
he that will not when he may, when he 
will he may have nay  Take advantage 
of an opportunity when it presents itself, 
even if you do not want or need it at the 
time, because it may no longer be available 
when you do: “‘It was a rather pretty little 
box, just the kind of thing you like. . . .’ 
‘I know,’ I said. ‘If you will not when you 
may, when you will you shall have nay’” 
(Barbara Pym, A Glass of Blessings, 1958). 
The proverb dates from before 1000: W. 
W. Skeat quotes Anglo-Saxon Homily in his 
Early English Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opportunity knocks but once.
he that will thrive must fi rst ask his 
wife  A married man’s fi nancial situation, 
his success or failure in business, and the 
like often depend on the behavior and dis-
position of his wife: “He that would thrive, 
must ask his wife. It was lucky for me that 
I had one as much dispos’d to industry and 
frugality as myself ” (Benjamin Franklin, 
Autobiography, 1790). The proverb dates 
from before 1500: Songs and Carols (c. 
1470) has: “Fore he that cast hym for to 
thryve, he must ask off his wiffe leve.”
he that lives in hope dances to an ill tune
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   120 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
121
he that would eat the fruit must climb 
the tree  Nothing is achieved without 
effort: It takes many years of study and 
training to become a brain surgeon—there 
is no easy way. He that would eat the fruit 
must climb the tree. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1721 in James Kelly’s Scottish 
Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: he that would 
eat the kernel must crack the nut.
he that would go to sea for pleasure 
would go to hell for a pastime  A sailor’s 
life can be so unpleasant and dangerous, it 
seems that those who choose spend their 
leisure hours at sea must be either mas-
ochistic or insane: “‘What made you come 
to sea anyway?’ ‘Search me. . . . To amuse 
myself, I suppose.’ ‘Well, a man who’d go 
to sea for fun’d go to hell for a pastime’” 
(Malcolm Lowry, Ultramarine, 1933). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1899 in A. 
J. Boyd’s Shellback.
he that would hang his dog gives out fi rst 
that he is mad  Those who are planning 
some action that might attract criticism 
fi rst seek to justify it in advance: The prime 
minister’s attack on his underling suggests that 
he plans a reshuffl e in the near future, for we 
all know that he that would hang his dog gives 
out fi rst that he is mad. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1530 in J. Palsgrave’s 
L’Éclaircissement de la langue française.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
give a dog a bad name and hang him.
he that would have eggs must endure the 
cackling of hens  You must be prepared 
to put up with something unpleasant or 
annoying in order to get what you want; 
also used of an undesirable aspect or 
drawback that accompanies something 
you like or enjoy: I hate my job at the burger 
bar—the hours are long, the customers are 
rude, and the pay is lousy—but I need to go on 
working there if I want to save enough money 
to go on vacation. As my mother always says, he 
that would have eggs must endure the cackling 
of hens. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1659.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the cat would eat fish, but would 
not wet her feet; you have to take 
the rough with the smooth.
he that would learn to pray, let him go 
to sea  Sailors face many dangers and 
life-threatening experiences at sea: We 
ran into what was later described as one of the 
worst storms in living memory, and the proverb 
“He that would learn to pray, let him go to 
sea” never seemed more appropriate than in 
the fi fteen terrifying hours that followed. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1640 in George Herbert’s Outlandish 
Proverbs, but the sentiment it expresses is 
of earlier origin.
he that would the daughter win, must 
with the mother fi rst begin  If you want 
to win the affections of a young woman, 
or persuade her to marry you, it is 
important to make a favorable impression 
on her mother: Her mother likes you, and 
that’s half the battle—mothers have a way of 
infl uencing their daughters’ choices, directly or 
indirectly. As the saying goes, “He that would 
the daughter win, must with the mother fi rst 
begin.” The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in 1578 in Courtly 
Controversy.
he travels fastest who travels 
alone  Those who go through life without 
the encumbrance of family responsibilities 
 he travels fastest who travels alone
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   121 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
122
make the best progress; also used more 
literally of companions on a journey: “The 
reason I can ‘do what I do’ is because 
I’ve never married. He travels fastest who 
travels alone, and that goes double for she” 
(Florence King, Refl ections in a Jaundiced Eye, 
1989). The proverb comes from Rudyard 
Kipling’s poem The Winners (1888): “Down 
to Gehenna or up to the Throne,/He trav-
els the fastest who travels alone.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that has a wife and children has 
given hostages to fortune.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: good company on the road is the 
shortest cut.
he who begins many things, fi nishes but 
few  Do not try to work on too many 
different projects at the same time, or 
you will end up achieving nothing: His 
life’s work consists of three great novels, and 
more than a hundred plot summaries for books 
that were never written—he who begins many 
things, fi nishes but few. The proverb’s fi rst 
use is recorded in Giovanni Torriano’s A 
Common Place of Italian Proverbs and Prover-
bial Phrases (1666).
he who chases two hares catches nei-
ther  See if you run after two hares, 
you will catch neither.
he who dances must pay the fi ddler  See 
they that dance must pay the fiddler.
he who does not work, neither should 
he eat  Idle people do not deserve to 
receive charitable handouts—everybody 
should earn his or her own living: “Con-
servatives like to cite that ancient Puritan 
teaching: ‘He who does not work, neither 
should he eat.’ But the fl ip side of that 
stern motto should be written in the 
social contract too: ‘He who does work, 
does deserve a decent break’” (Barbara 
Ehrenreich, Time, 1991). The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “Neither did we eat 
any man’s bread for nought; but wrought 
with labour and travail night and day. . . . 
For even when we were with you, this 
we commanded you, that if any would 
not work, neither should he eat” (2 Thes-
salonians 3:8–10). It is sometimes quoted 
in its more succinct Latin form, “Qui non 
laborat non manducet.”
Variant of this proverb: if you won’t 
work, you shan’t eat.
he who excuses himself accuses him-
self  By making an apology for some-
thing, or trying to justify it, or even 
denying it, you are actually making a 
confession of guilt: “The tests would be 
underground, every precaution taken, 
impossible to contaminate anything. One 
had heard these pleas before. . . . Who 
excuses himself accuses himself ” (Geof-
frey Wagner, Elegy for Corsica, 1968). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1611. It is 
sometimes quoted in its French form, 
“Qui s’excuse, s’accuse.”
Variant of this proverb: who excuses 
himself accuses himself.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: accusing the times is but excusing 
ourselves; never ask pardon before 
you are accused.
he who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day  It is wiser to with-
draw from a situation that you cannot 
win than to go on fi ghting and lose—by 
a strategic retreat you can return to the 
battle or argument with renewed energy 
at a later date: I conceded defeat at that point, 
he who begins many things, fi nishes but few
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   122 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
123
on the basis that he who fi ghts and runs away 
may live to fi ght another day, but I have every 
intention of mounting a fresh challenge as soon 
as I have gathered enough evidence to be sure 
of success. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1542, but the sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient origin: the Greek poet and 
dramatist Menander (c. 342–292 b.c.) 
wrote, “A man who fl ees will fi ght again.” 
It has given rise to the fi gurative phrase to 
live to fi ght another day.
Variant of this proverb: he who fi ghts 
and runs away may live to fi ght another 
day, but he that is in battle slain will never 
rise to fi ght again.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
discretion is the better part of valor; 
a live dog is better than a dead lion.
he who has a mind to beat a dog will 
easily fi nd a stick  See it’s easy to find 
a stick to beat a dog.
he who has a tiger by the tail dare not 
let go  See he who rides a tiger is 
afraid to dismount.
he who hesitates is lost  Do not be too 
slow to make a decision or take advantage 
of an opportunity: You don’t have forever to 
make up your mind—he who hesitates is lost, 
and if you don’t put in an offer for the house 
soon, somebody else will buy it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1713 in the form 
“The woman that deliberates is lost” in 
Joseph Addison’s Cato.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
delays are dangerous.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: look before you leap.
he who is absent is always in the 
wrong  It is easy to accuse or attack 
those who are not present to defend 
themselves or their rights or arguments: 
“I will quote fi rst that fi ne old French 
saying—which covers any claim Charlie 
may or may not have on that cake—‘he 
who is absent is always in the wrong’” 
(Anthony Price, Soldier No More, 1981). 
The French saying referred to in this 
quotation is “Les absents ont toujours tort.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in Eng-
lish in 1640 in the form “The absent 
party is still faulty.”
Variants of this proverb: the absent 
are always in the wrong; the absent are 
never without fault nor the present with-
out excuse.
he who is good at making excuses is sel-
dom good at anything else  Worthless 
or incapable people are constantly making 
excuses to cover up for their shortcom-
ings: They always have a plausible explanation 
for their failure to deliver, but I put it down to 
sheer incompetence—he who is good at making 
excuses is seldom good at anything else.
he who laughs last, laughs longest  Mi-
nor successes or failures along the way 
are of no signifi cance—the person who 
is ultimately triumphant is the only real 
winner; often used when somebody turns 
the tables with a fi nal act of retaliation: 
Their celebrations are somewhat premature—I 
still have one more trick up my sleeve, and he 
who laughs last, laughs longest. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1607 in the form 
“Hee laugheth best that laugheth to the 
end” (The Christmas Prince). Facetious vari-
ants include “He who laughs last didn’t 
get the point anyway” and “He who laughs 
last is probably an Englishman.” The prov-
erb has given rise to the fi gurative phrase 
to have the last laugh.
 he who laughs last, laughs longest
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   123 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
124
Variants of this proverb: he who 
laughs last, laughs best; he laughs best 
who laughs last.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let them laugh that win.
he who lives by the sword dies by the 
sword  Those who engage in aggression 
or violence will meet their death in a simi-
lar way. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“Put up again thy sword into his place: for 
all they that take the sword shall perish with 
the sword” (Matthew 26:52). Other words 
may be substituted for sword, as in the fol-
lowing quotations: “When you live by the 
gun you die by the gun” (Washington Post, 
1997) and “Live by the torch, die by the 
torch” (Stephen King, The Stand, 1978).
Variants of this proverb: he who lives 
by the sword shall perish by the sword; 
live by the sword, die by the sword.
he who never made a mistake never 
made anything  See if you don’t make 
mistakes you don’t make anything.
he who pays the piper calls the tune  The 
person who pays for a service or fi nances 
a project has the right to say how it should 
be done: The kitchen layout that our custom-
ers had specifi ed did not—in our professional 
opinion—make best use of the space, but he 
that pays the piper calls the tune, so we gave 
them what they wanted. First recorded 
in 1779 in Diary of Grace Galloway, the 
proverb has given rise to the fi gurative 
phrase to call the tune, meaning “to be in 
control.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
whose bread i eat, his song i sing.
he who rides a tiger is afraid to dis-
mount  When you are in a dangerous 
situation, or have embarked on a danger-
ous course of action, it is often safer to 
continue than to try to stop or withdraw: 
I knew that what I was doing was illegal, but he 
who rides a tiger is afraid to dismount, and the 
possible consequences of pulling out of the deal 
at this late stage didn’t bear thinking about. 
Of Chinese origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1875 in W. Scar-
borough’s Collection of Chinese Proverbs.
Variants of this proverb: he who rides 
the tiger can never dismount; He who has 
a tiger by the tail dare not let go.
he who sups with the devil should have 
a long spoon  Those who have dealings 
with wicked, dangerous, or dishonest 
people should remain on their guard and 
try not to become too intimately involved: 
“Hindenburg and the army thought they 
could use [Hitler]. . . . Who sups with 
the devil needs a long spoon” (Evelyn 
Anthony, The Grave of Truth, 1979). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 
1390). It occurs in Shakespeare’s play The 
Comedy of Errors (4:3), “He must have a 
long spoon that must eat with the devil.”
Variant of this proverb: he must have 
a long spoon who sups with the devil.
he who wills the end, wills the means 
Those who are determined to achieve 
something are equally determined to fi nd 
a way of achieving it: Finding his daughter 
in the vast and unfamiliar city seemed an 
impossible task, but somehow he succeeded—he 
who wills the end, wills the means. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1692, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
general use.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
where there’s a will there’s a way.
he who lives by the sword dies by the sword
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   124 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
125
he who would climb the ladder must 
begin at the bottom  You must start 
from a lowly position and rise through the 
ranks if you want to attain a position of 
high status or authority: “I was the lowest 
of the four in rank—but what then?—he 
that climbs a ladder must begin at the 
fi rst round” (Sir Walter Scott, Kenilworth, 
1821). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1710 in S. Palmer’s Moral Essays on some 
of the most Curious and Signifi cant English, 
Scotch and Foreign Proverbs.
he who would wish to thrive, must let 
spiders run alive  See if you want to 
live and thrive, let the spider run 
alive.
he who would write and can’t write can 
surely review  People who become crit-
ics are those who lack the talent to be 
novelists, dramatists, or other kinds of 
artists in their own right; used in response 
to a bad review: Asked to comment on the 
damning criticism of her book in the press, she 
simply shrugged her shoulders and said, “He 
who would write and can’t write can surely 
review.” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1848, in James Russell Lowell’s A Fable 
for Critics. Similar sentiments have been 
expressed by others: in 1870, Benjamin 
Disraeli wrote, “You know who the critics 
are? The men who have failed in literature 
and art.”
the higher the monkey climbs the more 
he shows his tail  People’s faults and 
shortcomings become increasingly obvi-
ous as they advance to positions of high 
offi ce: He was patently unsuited to such a 
responsible post, but was promoted nonetheless, 
and the current debacle in his department is 
proof of the saying that the higher the monkey 
climbs the more he shows his tail. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded, in rather more 
graphic form, as an explanatory note in 
John Wycliffe’s translation of the Bible 
(c. 1395): “the fi lthe of the hynd partis 
of an ape aperith more, whanne he stieth 
[climbs] on high.” In modern usage the 
word ass is sometimes substituted for 
tail.
the higher the tree, the sweeter the 
plum The best fruit is found at the top of 
the tree: The salaries are biggest at the top 
of the ladder; as the saying goes, the higher 
the tree, the sweeter the plum. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1659 in J. Howell’s 
Paroemiographia.
the highest branch is not the safest 
roost  Those in the highest positions of 
power or authority are, in some respects, 
the most vulnerable, because there will 
always be plenty of others eager to take 
their place or cause their downfall: I am 
happy in my work, and have no ambitions for 
further advancement—the highest branch is 
not the safest roost. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in 1563 
in Mirror for Magistrates.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the post of honor is the post of 
danger; uneasy lies the head that 
wears a crown.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: better be first in a village than 
second at rome.
history doesn’t repeat itself—historians 
do  See history repeats itself.
history is a fable agreed upon  History 
represents the traditionally accepted inter-
pretation of what actually happened in the 
 history is a fable agreed upon
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   125 1/29/07   5:12:37 PM
126
past: It is said that history is a fable agreed 
upon, but there seems to be a distinct lack of 
agreement among modern historians on some of 
the more controversial issues and events of the 
20th century. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1948 in a U.S. proverb collection.
history repeats itself  Similar events 
tend to recur in different periods of his-
tory—for example, when rulers or gov-
ernments fail to learn from the mistakes 
of those who have gone before; also used 
when some more trivial or personal inci-
dent recurs: “That age has passed away for 
ever. History repeats itself, it is true, but 
history will not bear mimicry” (Augustus 
Jessopp, The Coming of the Friars, 1885). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in George Eliot’s Scenes of Clerical 
Life (1858), but the sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient origin, occurring in the 
writings of the Greek historian Thucy-
dides (fi fth century b.c.). In 1852, in 
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, 
Karl Marx wrote, “Hegel says somewhere 
that all great events and personalities in 
world history reappear in one fashion or 
another. He forgot to add: the fi rst time as 
tragedy, the second as farce.”
Variant of this proverb: history 
doesn’t repeat itself—historians do.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the more things change, the more 
they stay the same.
hitch your wagon to a star  You must be 
ambitious, and aim to achieve the high-
est possible goal; also used as advice to 
cultivate the acquaintance of powerful, 
successful, or infl uential people who can 
help to advance your interests: “Hitch your 
wagon to a star” is one of the unoffi cial mot-
toes of the college, which has a reputation for 
encouraging students of all abilities to fulfi ll 
their potential. The proverb comes from 
Ralph Waldo Emerson’s essay “Civiliza-
tion,” in Society and Solitude (1870).
hoist your sail when the wind is 
fair  Take advantage of favorable condi-
tions or circumstances while they last: 
The market is very volatile, and things could 
change at any moment, so hoist your sail when 
the wind is fair and buy now! The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1583 in Melbancke’s 
Philotimus.
Variant of this proverb: hoist up the 
sail while the gale does last.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: make hay while the sun shines; 
strike while the iron is hot.
the hole calls the thief  Criminals and 
other wrong-doers will go where oppor-
tunity presents itself: The police knew very 
well that the hole calls the thief and that was 
the place to lay their trap. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1640 by George Herbert 
in Outlandish Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opportunity makes a thief.
home is home, be it ever so homely 
However simple or lowly a person’s abode 
may be, it is still his or her home and there-
fore the best place to be: On international 
business trips I’ve stayed in some of the best hotels 
in the world, but I’m always glad to get back to 
my own little apartment—home is home, be it 
ever so homely. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1546 in the form “Home is homely, 
though it be poor in sight.” A similar senti-
ment is expressed in the song “Home, 
Sweet Home” (1823) by J. H. Payne: “Be it 
ever so humble, there’s no place like 
home.”
history repeats itself
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   126 1/29/07   5:12:38 PM
127
Variant of this proverb: home is 
home though it’s never so homely.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: east, west, home’s best; there’s no 
place like home.
home is where the heart is  Home is 
the place where you are happiest, or 
where the people you love are: “They 
entertained several times a year, they 
went out to departmental parties from 
time to time, but these things did not 
interest Sulka much. Home was where 
her heart was” (Colette Dowling, The Cin-
derella Complex, 1981). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1870, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin. Other 
words may be substituted for heart, and a 
facetious variant of the proverb is “Home 
is where the mortgage is.”
home is where you hang your hat  Home 
is the place where you are currently living, 
to which you return at the end of the work-
ing day: People keep asking me if I’m going home 
for Thanksgiving—meaning back to my parent’s 
house in the country. As far as I’m concerned, 
home is where you hang your hat, and for me 
that’s New York City. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1930 in Fletcher’s Green Rope.
Homer sometimes nods  Even the great-
est minds have lapses of attention, leading 
to mistakes; often used as an excuse 
for error: “Scientifi c reason, like Homer, 
sometimes nods” (T. H. Huxley, Nine-
teenth Century, 1887). The proverb origi-
nated in the writings of the Roman poet 
Horace (65–8 b.c.): “Indignor quandoque 
bonus dormitat Homerus [I am indignant 
when the worthy Homer nods].”
Variant of this proverb: even Homer 
sometimes nods.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: nobody is infallible; to err is 
human, to forgive divine.
an honest look covereth many faults  An 
innocent demeanor may hide much guilt: 
No one suspected that such a guileless child 
could have done such a thing, but an honest 
look covereth many faults. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1642 in G. Torriano’s 
Select Italian Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: an honest 
good look covereth many faults.
an honest man’s word is as good as his 
bond  See a man’s word is as good as 
his bond.
honest men marry quickly, wise men not 
at all  Honest men marry without hesita-
tion, seeing no threat in a wife, but wise 
men know better. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded by James Howell in his 1645–55 
publication Epistolae Ho-Elianae: or Familiar 
Letters: “Honest men use to marry, but 
wise men not.”
honesty is more praised than prac-
ticed  Many people say that honesty is 
important, but few are always scrupu-
lously honest themselves: The latest revela-
tions from the White House suggest that the 
saying “Honesty is more praised than practiced” 
is nowhere more applicable than in the world 
of politics.
honesty is the best policy  Being honest 
or telling the truth is always the wisest 
course of action, although it is often not 
the easiest or most attractive option: “I 
am afraid we must make the world honest 
before we can honestly say to our children 
that honesty is the best policy” (Radio 
 honesty is the best policy
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   127 1/29/07   5:12:38 PM
128
address by George Bernard Shaw, 1932). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1605. 
In his Apophthegms (1854), the English 
politician, philosopher, and theologian 
Richard Whately wrote, “Honesty is the 
best policy; but he who is governed by 
that maxim is not an honest man.”
Variant of this proverb: honesty is 
the best policy, though it may not pay the 
largest dividends.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
cheaters never prosper; honesty pays.
honesty pays  You will ultimately reap 
the benefi ts of being honest, although these 
are not always immediately obvious: It took 
a lot of courage to own up to my mistake, but 
honesty pays—if only by relieving the burden 
of guilt that I have been carrying around for the 
past few days. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1876 in W. G. Nash New England Life.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: cheaters never prosper; honesty 
is the best policy.
honey catches more fl ies than vinegar 
See you can catch more flies with 
honey than with vinegar.
honors change manners  People who 
improve their status in society all too 
often become arrogant: “How I have 
offended the Lord of Lindesay I know 
not, unless honours have changed man-
ners” (Walter Scott, The Abbot, 1820). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
c. 1430 by John Lydgate in Chaucer but is 
Roman in origin.
Scottish variant of this proverb: lord-
ships change manners.
the hook without bait catches no fi sh  If 
you want to tempt or persuade people, 
you need to offer them something attrac-
tive as an incentive: The company believes 
that the hook without bait catches no fi sh, and 
the fi rst thousand customers to sign up for a 
loan will enjoy signifi cantly reduced interest 
rates for the fi rst twelve months. The proverb 
is recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
hope and have  If a person wants some-
thing badly enough he or she is likely to 
achieve it: “Hope and have, in time a man 
may gaine any woman” (A. Fraunce in En-
glish Parnassus, 1913). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded 1540 in J. Palsgrave’s Acolastus.
Variant of this proverb: hope well 
and have well.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: hope for the best and prepare for 
the worst.
hope deferred makes the heart sick  De-
lay in getting what you desire, or in learn-
ing whether or not your hopes are to be 
realized, is a cause of great anxiety and 
distress: Hope deferred makes the heart sick, 
and after waiting in vain for promotion for more 
than ten years he fi nally left the army, a bitter 
and disillusioned man. The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Hope deferred maketh the 
heart sick: but when the desire cometh, it 
is a tree of life” (Proverbs 13:12).
hope for the best and prepare for the 
worst  Remain optimistic, but make 
sure that you are mentally or physically 
prepared to cope with failure or disas-
ter: “The youngest of us cannot always 
escape—hoping, trusting, relying on the 
best, we should be prepared for the 
worst” (Edward Howard, Rattlin the Reefer, 
1836). The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in 1565.
honesty pays
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   128 1/29/07   5:12:38 PM
129
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
put your trust in god, and keep your 
powder dry.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: hope and have.
hope is a good breakfast but a bad 
supper  There is no harm in being opti-
mistic at the beginning of something, but 
beware of being left with nothing but 
unrealized expectations at the end: Hope 
is a good breakfast but a bad supper, and when 
darkness forced them to abandon their efforts to 
fi nd the missing child, the morale of the search 
party was at its lowest ebb. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1625 in Francis Bacon’s 
Apophthegms.
hope keeps the heart from breaking  See 
if it were not for hope, the heart 
would break.
hope springs eternal in the human 
breast  It is human nature to remain opti-
mistic—even after a setback, or despite 
evidence to the contrary: “Night after 
night his disappointment is acute, but hope 
springs eternal in the scholastic breast” 
(Charles Dickens, Our Mutual Friend, 
1865). The proverb comes from Alexan-
der Pope’s Essay on Man (1732): “Hope 
springs eternal in the human breast:/Man 
never Is, but always To be blest.” It is often 
shortened to “Hope springs eternal.”
hope well and have well  See hope and 
have.
a horse can’t pull while kicking  People 
engaged in acts of insubordination or 
protest cannot work effi ciently or produc-
tively: There is no room in this organization 
for anybody who refuses to toe the line—a 
horse can’t pull while kicking. The proverb 
is recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
horses for courses  Different people 
have different strengths and talents, and 
each person should be assigned to the 
task or job that is best suited to that par-
ticular individual: “Horses for courses is 
a sound adage in motoring as well as the 
turf, and few British motorists would look 
to Czechoslovakia for their car” (Daily 
Telegraph, 1972). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1891 (A. E. T. Watson, Turf ) 
in a horse-racing context, with the implica-
tion that it was already in frequent use in 
that context.
hot love is soon cold  Passions that arise 
suddenly are liable to subside equally 
quickly: “I hope that such hot love cannot 
be so soone colde” (John Lyly, Euphues: The 
Anatomy of Wit, 1578). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1537 in R. Whitford’s 
Werke for Householders.
an hour in the morning is worth two in 
the evening  People are at their most 
effi cient early in the day, when they are 
refreshed by sleep: When it comes to preparing 
for exams, students would do well to remember the 
saying “An hour in the morning is worth two in 
the evening.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1827 in William Hone’s Every-Day Book.
Variant of this proverb: an hour 
before breakfast is worth two the rest of 
the day.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
lose and hour in the morning, chase 
it all day.
a house divided against itself cannot 
stand  The members of a group must 
 a house divided against itself cannot stand
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   129 1/29/07   5:12:38 PM
130
remain united if the group is to suc-
ceed or survive; sometimes used to warn 
against dissension: “‘A house divided 
against itself cannot stand.’ I believe this 
government cannot endure, permanently 
half slave and half free” (Speech by Abra-
ham Lincoln, 1858). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Every kingdom divided 
against itself is brought to desolation; and 
every city or house divided against itself 
shall not stand” (Matthew 12:25); “If a 
house be divided against itself, that house 
cannot stand” (Mark 3:25).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: divide and conquer; united we 
stand, divided we fall.
the house shows the owner  A person’s 
character is revealed by the state of his or 
her house: The house was disturbingly tidy, 
but, as they say, the house shows the owner. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1611 
by Randle Cotgrave in A Dictionary of the 
French and English Tongues.
a house without books is like a room 
without windows  Books brighten and 
enlighten our daily lives in the same way 
that windows brighten and illuminate 
a room: If it is true that a house without 
books is like a room without windows, then 
my uncle’s house must be the darkest place 
on earth—the only reading matter to be 
found there was on the cans and boxes in 
the pantry!
humble hearts have humble desires  Peo-
ple with timid characters tend to have 
modest ambitions: Humble hearts have hum-
ble desires, but surely no one could be content 
with such meagre rewards. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1640 by George Herbert 
in Outlandish Proverbs.
hunger drives the wolf out of the 
wood  People in dire need are forced 
to do things that would be unwise or 
undesirable in other circumstances: “‘He 
says he doesn’t want anything to eat,’ 
answered Nanon; ‘that’s not good for 
him.’ ‘So much saved,’ retorted her mas-
ter. ‘That’s so,’ she said. ‘Bah! he won’t cry 
long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the 
woods’” (Honoré de Balzac, Eugenie Gran-
det, 1833). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in the late 15th century, but 
there is evidence of a French version in 
the early 14th century.
hunger is the best sauce  Hunger makes 
all food taste good, regardless of its qual-
ity or the way it is served: We were starving 
after our long walk, and nobody complained 
about my cooking that night—hunger is the 
best sauce! The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1530, but the sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient origin. Compare Cicero 
(106–43 b.c.): “cibi condimentum esse famem 
[hunger is the spice of food].”
Variant of this proverb: hunger is the 
best pickle.
hungry bellies have no ears  See a hun-
gry stomach has no ears.
a hungry man is an angry man  Hunger 
makes people angry, often dangerously 
so: The strikers and their families were starv-
ing, and a hungry man is an angry man, so 
we took care not to provoke them. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded c. 1641 in David 
Fergusson’s Scottish Proverbs.
a hungry stomach has no ears  There is 
no point in talking to or reasoning with 
hungry people, or those who are greed-
ily devouring their food: You’re wasting 
the house shows the owner
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   130 1/29/07   5:12:38 PM
131
your breath—these people are starving, and a 
hungry stomach has no ears. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded c. 1770 in W. Hubbard’s 
General History of New England.
Variant of this proverb: hungry bel-
lies have no ears.
hurry no man’s cattle  Do not try to 
make others hurry or rush because you 
are impatient: “I knew that in due time 
he would tell me the result of these 
mental exercises; in the meantime I 
stood by the old adage—hurry no man’s 
cattle” (J. S. Fletcher, Murder of the Ninth 
Baronet, 1932). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1822 in Sir Walter Scott’s 
The Pirate.
Variant of this proverb: don’t rush 
the cattle.
the husband is always the last to 
know  When a wife is unfaithful to her 
husband, he is always the last person 
to fi nd out about it; also used in other 
similar situations: He was devastated to 
learn that his wife was having an affair, 
and even more upset when he discovered that 
most of their friends had known about it for 
months—as they say, the husband is always 
the last to know. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1604. The word wife may be 
substituted for husband, as in Margaret 
Mitchell’s Gone with the Wind (1936): “‘I 
thought surely the whole town knew by 
now. Perhaps they all do, except you. You 
know the old adage: ‘The wife is always 
the last one to fi nd out.’”
Variant of this proverb: the husband 
is always the last to fi nd out.
 the husband is always the last to know
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   131 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
ååå   å
132
an idle brain is the devil’s work-
shop  Those who do not have worth-
while or constructive things to think 
about may turn their minds to mischief 
or crime: “Steady employment . . . keeps 
one out of mischief, for truly an idle 
brain is the devil’s workshop” (Samuel 
Smiles, Self-Help, 1859). The proverb 
dates from before 1602 in W. Perkins’s 
Treatise of Callings.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the devil finds work for idle 
hands to do; idleness is the root of 
all evil.
idleness is the root of all evil  A lack 
of useful things to do is the cause of much 
crime and wrongdoing: “‘The boy will be 
idle there,’ said Miss Murdstone . . . ‘and 
idleness is the root of all evil’” (Charles 
Dickens, David Copperfi eld, 1850). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1422, in the 
form “Idleness is the root of vices,” but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin, 
and has been attributed to Saint Bernard 
(1090–1153). Its current form fi rst occurs 
in George Farquhar’s play The Beaux’ Strata-
gem (1707), and it was probably infl uenced 
by the biblical quotation “the love of money 
is the root of all evil” (1 Timothy 6:10).
Variant of this proverb: idleness is 
the mother of all the vices.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the devil finds work for idle 
hands to do; an idle brain is the 
devil’s workshop.
idle people have the least leisure  Peo-
ple who are naturally disinclined to work 
always claim to be far too busy to do what 
is requested of them; also interpreted 
more literally, with the implication that 
those who are slow and lazy in their work 
have little or no spare time for leisure: 
He sits in his offi ce all day—doing very little, 
as far as we can tell—but when the shop gets 
busy he says he has no time to help. As they say, 
idle people have the least leisure. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1678 in the form 
“Idle folks have the most labor.”
Variant of this proverb: idle people 
lack no excuses.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the busiest men have the most 
leisure.
an idle youth, a needy age  People who 
do not work hard when they are young 
will have nothing set aside for when they 
are old. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1611 in Randle Cotgrave’s A Dictionary of 
the French and English Tongues.
Variant of this proverb: be not idle 
and you shall not be longing.
i
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   132 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
133
if a job’s worth doing, it’s worth doing 
well  See if a thing’s worth doing, 
it’s worth doing well.
if and an spoils many a good charter 
Excellent plans may be doomed to fail-
ure because of the conditions that come 
with them: “Then he came with his If’s 
and And’s” (Samuel Richardson, Clarissa, 
1748). The proverb was recorded, c. 1535, 
by Sir Thomas More: “what quod the pro-
tectour thou servest me I wene with iffes 
and with andes.”
if anything can go wrong, it will  If 
there is the remotest possibility of failure 
or disaster, you can be sure that it will 
happen; often used of a minor detail, 
overlooked in planning, that has a major 
detrimental effect: If anything can go wrong, 
it will—as the bride walked down the hall, 
ready to set off for the church, the dog bounded 
in from the garden, leaped up to greet her, and 
planted its muddy paws on the bodice of her 
snow-white wedding dress. First recorded in 
this form in 1956, the proverb is popu-
larly known as Murphy’s Law, allegedly 
named for the aircraft engineer Captain 
Edward E. Murphy and coined by one of 
his colleagues in 1949. It has a number of 
facetious corollaries—for example, “Of 
the things that can’t go wrong, some will” 
and “If two or more things can go wrong, 
the one that will go wrong fi rst is the one 
that will cause the most damage.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: bread always falls buttered side 
down.
if a pig had wings, it might fl y  Some 
things are not just improbable, but down-
right impossible; said to somebody who 
puts forward such a suggestion: “‘So, 
except for the crew, we’d keep her [the 
submarine] . . .’ ‘Yes, if we could hide her. 
And if a pig had wings, it could fl y’” (Tom 
Clancy, The Hunt for Red October, 1984). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, with dif-
ferent wording, in 1862, by A. Hislop in 
The Proverbs of Scotland.
Variants of this proverb: pigs may fl y, 
but they are very unlikely birds; if frogs 
had wings, they wouldn’t bump their tails 
on rocks.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if ifs and ans were pots and pans, 
there’d be no work for tinkers; if 
wishes were horses, beggars would 
ride; if the sky falls, we shall catch 
larks.
if at fi rst you don’t succeed, try, try 
again  Do not be discouraged by failure, 
and never give up—if you keep trying 
you will ultimately enjoy success: Their 
motto is “If at fi rst you don’t succeed, try, try 
again”—this is their third attempt to break 
the record for nonstop circumnavigation of the 
globe. The proverb comes from a rhyme 
fi rst recorded in Thomas H. Palmer’s 
Teacher’s Manual (1840): “ ’Tis a lesson you 
should heed,/Try, try again./If at fi rst 
you don’t succeed,/Try, try again.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the third time is the charm.
if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth doing 
well  Always make your best effort, and 
do not be content with what is merely 
adequate: “If a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth 
doing well” is certainly Bob’s motto—and 
you’ve never seen such a thorough and meticu-
lous young man. The proverb comes from 
a letter written by Lord Chesterfi eld in 
1746: “In truth, whatever is worth doing 
at all is worth doing well.”
 if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth doing well
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   133 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
134
Variants of this proverb: anything 
worth doing is worth doing well; if a job’s 
worth doing, it’s worth doing well.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the good is the enemy of the best; 
never do things by halves.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the best is the enemy of the 
good.
if every man would sweep his own door-
step, the city would soon be clean  If 
people made an effort to improve their 
own behavior, instead of criticizing other 
people’s, the world would be a better 
place: “It appears to be hard to draw 
a clear distinction between deciding a 
question of right and wrong for one’s self 
and deciding it for others. . . . ‘If every 
man would sweep his own doorstep the 
city would soon be clean’” (London Times, 
1930). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection, but the sentiment it expresses 
is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
sweep your own doorstep clean.
if frogs had wings, they wouldn’t bump 
their tails on rocks  See if a pig had 
wings, it might fly.
if God did not exist, it would be neces-
sary to invent him  People have an innate 
need to believe in a divine creator who 
controls their destinies: Any attempt to abol-
ish religion is doomed to failure—if God did 
not exist, it would be necessary to invent him. In 
its current form, the proverb comes from 
the writings of the French philosopher 
Voltaire (1694–1778): “Si Dieu n’existait 
pas, il faudrait l’inventer.” The sentiment it 
expresses, however, is of ancient origin: 
compare Ovid (43 b.c.–a.d. 18), “Expedit 
esse deos, et, ut expedit, esse putemus [It is 
convenient that there be gods, and, as it is 
convenient, let us believe that there are].” 
In modern usage of the proverb, the name 
of some other indispensable person or 
thing is often substituted for God.
Variant of this proverb: if there were 
no God, it would be necessary to invent 
him.
if ifs and ans were pots and pans, 
there’d be no work for tinkers  We 
must be realistic, and not talk about 
things—however desirable—that are 
unlikely to happen; said to somebody 
who makes a statement prefaced by “if ”: 
“If the weather clears up before lunchtime, and 
if Jack has managed to fi x my car by then, we 
could drive to the coast this afternoon.” “If ifs 
and ans were pots and pans, there’d be no work 
for tinkers.” The word ans (or ands) is an 
archaic word meaning “ifs.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if a pig had wings, it might fly; if 
wishes were horses, beggars would 
ride; if the sky falls, we shall catch 
larks.
if it ain’t broke, don’t fi x it  Do not 
try to improve on something that is 
already working well: “If your version of 
Windows 98 works fi ne and does what 
you want then there is no real reason 
to upgrade. . . . The . . . adage applies: 
If it ain’t broke, don’t fi x it” (Guardian, 
2001). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1977, popularized by Bert Lance, 
director of the Offi ce of Management 
and Budget in President Jimmy Carter’s 
administration.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
leave well enough alone.
if every man would sweep his own doorstep, the city would soon be clean
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   134 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
135
if it looks like a duck, walks like a duck, 
and quacks like a duck, it’s a duck   It 
is usually safe to identify somebody as 
a particular type of person when his or 
her appearance, behavior, and words all 
point to the same conclusion: If it looks 
like a duck, walks like a duck, and quacks like 
a duck, it’s a duck—everything about my son’s 
new girlfriend suggested that she was not the 
innocent, chaste young lady she claimed to be. 
Of U.S. origin, the proverb dates from 
the 1950s and was originally applied to 
suspected communists.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: appearances are deceiving.
if it takes two to make a bargain, it takes 
two to break it  See it takes two to 
make a bargain.
if it were not for hope, the heart would 
break  You must cling to hope when you 
have nothing else, because the alterna-
tive is despair: “No harm in hoping, Jack! 
My uncle says, Were it not for hope, the 
heart would break” (Samuel Richardson, 
Clarissa, 1748). The proverb dates from 
before 1250.
Variant of this proverb: hope keeps 
the heart from breaking.
if one sheep leaps over the ditch, all the 
rest will follow Where one person sets an 
example by doing something risky or dan-
gerous others are likely to follow: “One 
sheep will leap the ditch when another 
goes fi rst” (Walter Scott, Old Mortality, 
1816).
if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch  When ignorant or inex-
perienced people are guided by those no 
more knowledgeable than themselves, 
the result is disaster: The instructors were 
unfamiliar with some of the equipment they 
were training us to use, so accidents seemed 
inevitable—if the blind lead the blind, both 
shall fall into the ditch. The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Let them alone: they 
be blind leaders of the blind. And if 
the blind lead the blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch” (Matthew 15:14). It has 
given rise to the cliché the blind leading 
the blind.
if the cap fi ts, wear it  See if the shoe 
fits, wear it.
if the mountain will not come to Moham-
med, Mohammed must go to the moun-
tain  If you cannot get what you want, 
you must adjust yourself to the circum-
stances or adopt a different approach: 
They ignored our petition, and refused to send 
a representative to our protest meeting, so we 
marched en masse to their headquarters to put 
our case against the proposed development—
if the mountain will not come to Moham-
med, Mohammed must go to the mountain. 
The proverb comes from a story about 
the prophet Mohammed, the founder of 
Islam, related in Francis Bacon’s essay “Of 
Boldnesse” (1597).
if there were no clouds, we shouldn’t 
enjoy the sun  We cannot fully appreci-
ate the good things in life unless they are 
interspersed with bad times: Life could 
be better at the moment, but I mustn’t grum-
ble—if there were no clouds, we shouldn’t 
enjoy the sun.
if there were no God, it would be neces-
sary to invent him  See if god did not 
exist, it would be necessary to invent 
him.
 if there were no God, it would be necessary to invent him
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   135 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
136
if there were no receivers, there would 
be no thieves  Those who assist wrong-
doers indirectly by enabling them to profi t 
from their crimes are equally guilty: Read-
ers are hungry for stories about other people’s 
private lives, however unscrupulously they may 
be obtained, so the editors of these publications 
should not take all the blame—if there were 
no receivers, there would be no thieves. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin, occurring in Chaucer’s Canterbury 
Tales (c. 1390).
Variant of this proverb: the receiver 
is as bad as the thief.
if the shoe fi ts, wear it  If it seems 
that a critical remark applies to you, 
then you must accept it; often said when 
somebody’s response to a general remark 
suggests that it is appropriate to that par-
ticular person: “‘You mean me? Are you 
callin me a son of a bitch?’ ‘If the shoe 
fi ts, friend, you wear it’” (James Jones, 
From Here to Eternity, 1951). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1773. 
A facetious variant is “If the shoe fi ts, it 
isn’t on sale.”
Variant of this proverb: if the cap 
fi ts, wear it.
if the sky falls, we shall catch larks  Do 
not make plans based on things that can-
not possibly happen: ”If I could convince 
the committee that the project has educational 
value, they might give us the funding we need.” 
“And if the sky falls, we shall catch larks.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in c. 1445.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if a pig had wings, it might fly; if 
ifs and ans were pots and pans, there’d 
be no work for tinkers; if wishes were 
horses, beggars would ride.
if two ride on a horse, one must ride 
behind  When two people undertake a 
joint activity or enterprise, one of them 
invariably takes the lead and the other has 
to be content with a more subordinate 
role; also used of a fi ght or argument, 
where only one can win and the other 
must lose or surrender: “Collaboration 
on a book is an awkward business. If 
two people ride one horse, one of them 
must ride behind” (Anna Clarke, The 
Mystery Lady, 1986). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in Shakespeare’s play Much Ado 
about Nothing (3:5), “An two men ride of 
a horse, one must ride behind.”
Variant of this proverb: when two 
ride one horse, one must sit behind.
if wind blows on you through a hole, say 
your prayers and mind your soul  It is 
not good for your health to be in a drafty 
place: My aunt liked to sit in the corner of 
the room, far from any half-open doors or 
windows. “If wind blows on you through a 
hole, say your prayers and mind your soul,” 
she used to say. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1736 in Papers of Benjamin 
Franklin.
if wishes were horses, beggars would 
ride  There is no point in indulging in 
wishful thinking: “I agree that she’d be an 
ideal wife . . . but if wishes were horses, 
then beggars would ride” (Mary Scott, The 
White Elephant, 1959). The proverb dates 
from before 1628 in the form “If wishes 
were horses, poor men would ride.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if a pig had wings, it might fly; 
if ifs and ans were pots and pans, 
there’d be no work for tinkers; if 
the sky falls, we shall catch larks; 
wishes won’t wash dishes.
if there were no receivers, there would be no thieves
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   136 1/29/07   5:12:39 PM
137
if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em  If you 
cannot defeat your rivals or opponents, 
it may be expedient to form an alliance 
with them; alternatively, if you can’t stop 
people doing something you object to, 
you might as well start doing it yourself: 
Our competitors initially condemned our busi-
ness methods as unscrupulous, but when we 
began to dominate the market they were forced 
to follow suit, on the basis of the saying “If 
you can’t beat ’em, join ’em.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, in its variant form, in 
1941, but with the implication that it had 
long been in use as a political adage.
Variant of this proverb: if you can’t 
lick ’em, join ’em.
if you can’t be good, be careful  If you 
are tempted to do something immoral or 
illegal, take care not to land yourself in 
trouble by being caught or found out—
specifi cally, if you are going to engage in 
casual sex, use a contraceptive. It is said 
jocularly as part of a good-bye: “Always 
bear in mind what the country mother 
said to her daughter who was coming 
up to town to be apprenticed to the 
Bond Street millinery, ‘For heaven’s sake 
be good; but if you can’t be good, be 
careful’” (Arthur M. Binstead, Pitcher in 
Paradise, 1903). The quotation is the fi rst 
recorded use of the proverb. The senti-
ment it expresses, however, is of ancient 
origin: compare the 11th-century Latin 
proverb “Si non caste, tamen caute [If not 
chastely, nevertheless cautiously].”
if you can’t bite, never show your 
teeth  Do not make empty threats; also 
used to warn against making a show of 
aggression when you unable to defend 
yourself: If you can’t bite, never show your 
teeth—they know you have no legal grounds 
for evicting them, and they will laugh in your 
face if you threaten to do so. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1615 by J. Chamberlain.
Variant of this proverb: never show 
your teeth unless you can bite.
if you can’t lick ’em, join ’em  See if you 
can’t beat ’em, join ’em.
if you can’t run with the big dogs, 
stay under the porch  If you lack the 
strength, courage, skill, or experience to 
compete with the major players—in poli-
tics, business, or any other fi eld—then it 
is better not to try at all: “Signaling that 
he was primed for battle, Mr. Bush closed 
with these words: ‘So you tell Governor 
Clinton and that Congress, “If you can’t 
run with the big dogs, stay under the 
porch”’” (New York Times, 1992).
if you can’t stand the heat, get out of the 
kitchen  If you cannot cope with the pace 
or stress, as in a competitive industry or in 
a position of high offi ce, then you should 
leave or resign: “If you can’t stand the heat, 
get out of the kitchen. That’s what tough-
talking politicians say, making it sound as 
though only a wimp would head for the 
exit” (Washington Post, 1990). The proverb 
was popularized by President Harry S. Tru-
man (1884–1972), who attributed it to his 
friend General Harry Vaughan.
Variant of this proverb: if you don’t 
like the heat, get out of the kitchen.
if you desire peace, prepare for war  See 
if you want peace, prepare for war.
if you don’t like it, you can lump it 
Whether or not you like what is offered or 
approve of what is proposed, you will have 
to put up with it: I’m inviting Jack and Sarah 
 if you don’t like it, you can lump it
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   137 1/29/07   5:12:40 PM
138
for Thanksgiving, and if you don’t like it you 
can lump it. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1828. The phrase lump it, which means 
“put up with it,” is sometimes replaced by 
a more vulgar alternative.
if you don’t like the heat, get out of the 
kitchen  See if you can’t stand the 
heat, get out of the kitchen.
if you don’t make mistakes, you don’t 
make anything  Do not be afraid of 
making mistakes—the only way to avoid 
them is to do nothing at all: Errors like these 
can easily be put right, so don’t worry—if you 
don’t make mistakes, you don’t make anything. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in a speech 
by Edward John Phelps (1822–1900) at 
the Mansion House, London, England, in 
January 1889: “The man who makes no 
mistakes does not usually make anything.”
Variant of this proverb: he who never 
made a mistake never made anything.
if you don’t speculate, you can’t accu-
mulate  You will not succeed or get rich 
unless you are prepared to take risks and 
spend money: I was uneasy at fi rst about put-
ting money into the venture, but if you don’t 
speculate you can’t accumulate, and it could 
prove to be a very profi table investment if all 
goes well. The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
in its variant form, in 1941 in D. Dodge’s 
Death and Taxes.
Variant of this proverb: you never 
accumulate if you don’t speculate.
if you don’t toot your own horn, nobody 
else will  See toot your own horn 
lest the same be never tooted.
if you lie down with dogs, you’ll get up 
with fl eas  If you associate with dishon-
est or disreputable people, you are likely 
to acquire their undesirable qualities: “If 
you lie down with dogs, you’ll get up with 
fl eas, and that’s the fruits of travelling with 
a fool” (Charles Lever, Jack Hinton, 1842). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1573 in 
the form “He that goes to bed with dogs 
arises with fl eas.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: he that touches pitch shall be 
defiled.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the sun loses nothing by shining 
into a puddle.
if you pay peanuts, you get monkeys 
Competent and highly qualifi ed people 
will not work for derisory fees or wages: 
She complained about the caliber of applicants 
for the post, but when she told me what they 
would be earning, I was not surprised. “If you 
pay peanuts, you get monkeys,” I said. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1966 by L. 
Coulthard in Director.
if you play with fi re, you get burned  If 
you engage in dangerous activities, mix 
with dangerous people, and the like, 
you are likely to suffer harm: I warned 
her that it was a risky enterprise, but she 
wouldn’t listen, so I’ve no sympathy for 
her—if you play with fi re, you get burned. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1884, but the fi gurative phrase 
to play with fi re is of earlier origin. It 
occurs in Henry Vaughan’s poem “The 
Garland” (1655): “I played with fi re, did 
counsell spurn. . . . But never thought 
that fi re would burn.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t play 
with fi re.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s ill jesting with edged tools.
if you don’t like the heat, get out of the kitchen
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   138 1/29/07   5:12:40 PM
139
if you’re born to be hanged, then you’ll 
never be drowned  Everybody is des-
tined to die in a particular way at a 
particular moment and is therefore not 
in mortal danger at any other time; said 
by those who risk death and of those who 
miraculously escape it: His friends urged 
him not to set sail until the weather improved, 
but he simply shrugged his shoulders and 
replied, “If you’re born to be hanged, then you’ll 
never be drowned.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1593, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin. 
Compare the 14th-century French pro-
verb “Noyer ne peut, cil qui doit pendre [He 
cannot drown who must hang].”
Variant of this proverb: he that is born 
to be hanged shall never be drowned.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every bullet has its billet.
if you’re not part of the solution, you’re 
part of the problem  Those who can-
not or will not help to solve a problem 
or improve a situation are a positive hin-
drance: “We must fi ght ‘hunger,’ but never 
Communism, even when Communism 
itself is the direct cause of hunger. Well, as 
our radicals used to say, if you’re not part 
of the solution, you’re part of the prob-
lem” (National Review, 1985). The proverb 
is attributed to the U.S. activist Eldridge 
Cleaver (1935–98), who used the words 
“you’re either part of the solution or you’re 
part of the problem” in a speech in 1968, 
but it may be of earlier origin.
if you run after two hares, you will catch 
neither  If you try to do two things at 
once you will fail at both: “Let’s take 
things a step at a time. You know what 
they say. If you run after two hares you 
will catch neither” (Peter O’Donnell, The 
Xanadu Talisman, 1981). The proverb is 
probably of ancient origin; in his Adagia 
(1500) the Dutch humanist Desiderius 
Erasmus quotes the Latin proverb “Duos 
insequens lepores, neutrum capit [He who 
chases two hares catches neither].”
Variant of this proverb: he who 
chases two hares catches neither.
if you sing before breakfast, you’ll cry 
before supper  See sing before break-
fast, cry before night.
if you’ve got it, fl aunt it  Those who 
have wealth, beauty, or talent should not be 
ashamed to show it off; used as an excuse 
for ostentation: “Old money’s motto was, 
If you have it, hide it. New money’s motto 
was, If you have it, fl aunt it” (Sidney Sheldon, 
The Master of the Game, 1982).
if you want a thing done well, do it 
yourself  The only way to be sure that 
something is done properly is to do 
it yourself—you cannot rely on other 
people to do exactly what you want: I 
told you to slice the meat, not hack it into 
chunks. Give me the knife—if you want a 
thing well done, do it yourself! The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in 1541. Its current form may date 
from 1858, when it was used in a poem 
by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: “That’s 
what I always say; if you want a thing to be 
well done,/You must do it yourself.”
Variant of this proverb: if you want 
something done right, do it yourself.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you would be well served, serve 
yourself.
if you want peace, prepare for war  A 
nation that is seen to be ready and able to 
 if you want peace, prepare for war
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   139 1/29/07   5:12:40 PM
140
defend itself—for example, with strong 
armed forces and powerful weapons—is 
less likely to be attacked: “As always, the 
success of diplomacy rests on the latent 
availability of force. If you seek peace, 
prepare for war” (Washington Times, 1990). 
The proverb occurs in the work of the 
Roman military writer Flavius Vegetius 
(fourth century a.d.): “qui desiderat pacem, 
praeparet bellum [he who desires peace 
must prepare for war],” but it is probably 
of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: if you desire 
peace, prepare for war.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: one sword keeps another in its 
scabbard.
if you want something done, ask a busy 
person  Busy people are reliable and effi -
cient workers who get things done quickly 
and are adept at reorganizing their time to 
slot in extra work: It’s the usual story: if you 
want something done, ask a busy person. At least 
you know they will deliver the goods.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the busiest men have the most leisure.
if you want something done right, do it 
yourself  See if you want a thing done 
well, do it yourself.
if you want to live and thrive, let the 
spider run alive  According to popular 
superstition, it is unlucky to kill a spider: 
I’m terrifi ed of these eight-legged beasts, but 
every time I reach for a newspaper to squash 
one, or turn on the faucet to drown one, I recall 
a rhyme learned in childhood, “If you want to 
live and thrive, let the spider run alive.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1867, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
regional use in England.
Variant of this proverb: he who 
would wish to thrive, must let spiders 
run alive.
if you won’t work, you shan’t eat  See he 
who does not work, neither should 
he eat.
if you would be happy for a week take a 
wife, if you would be happy for a month 
kill a pig, but if you would be happy all 
your life plant a garden  The pleasures 
of marriage, good food and so on are 
ephemeral, but a garden is a lasting 
source of joy: I had a bachelor uncle who 
used to say, “If you would be happy for a 
week take a wife, if you would be happy for a 
month kill a pig, but if you would be happy 
all your life plant a garden.” My recent divorce 
has proved the fi rst part of the saying to be 
accurate, and I am now seriously considering 
the horticultural option. The proverb exists 
in numerous forms, dating from before 
1661. Most versions include the opening 
clause, but other suggestions for lifetime 
happiness are “be an honest man” and 
“turn priest.”
if you would be well served, serve your-
self  The work of hired staff may fall 
below the standard you require, so the 
only way to be sure of satisfaction is to 
do the work yourself: “‘If you would be 
well served, serve yourself.’ Some gentle-
men took pleasure in being their own 
gardeners” (J. E. Austen-Leigh, A Memoir 
of Jane Austen, 1871). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1706.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you want a thing done well, do it 
yourself.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
why keep a dog and bark yourself?
if you want something done, ask a busy person
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   140 1/29/07   5:12:40 PM
141
ignorance is a voluntary misfortune  Ev-
erybody has the opportunity to acquire 
knowledge, so you have only yourself to 
blame if you remain ignorant: My grand-
father was a self-taught scholar, whose motto 
was “Ignorance is a voluntary misfortune.” The 
proverb is recorded as a regional expres-
sion in the United States.
ignorance is bliss  It is often better not 
to have knowledge that would alarm or 
distress you: Ignorance is bliss, and we drove 
off without a care in the world, unaware of the 
disaster that lay ahead. The proverb comes 
from Thomas Gray’s poem “Ode on a 
Distant Prospect of Eton College” (1742): 
“Yet ah! why should they know their 
fate? . . . Thought would destroy their 
paradise./No more; where ignorance is 
bliss,/’Tis folly to be wise.” It has given 
rise to the clichés blissful ignorance and 
blissfully ignorant.
Variant of this proverb: where igno-
rance is bliss, ’tis folly to be wise.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what you don’t know can’t hurt 
you.
ignorance of the law is no excuse  You 
cannot argue that you are not guilty of 
a crime because you were unaware that 
you were doing anything illegal: I had no 
idea that drinking alcohol in public places was 
banned, but ignorance of the law is no excuse 
in this or any other country. The proverb is 
of Latin origin: “Ignorantia iuris neminem 
excusat [Ignorance of the law excuses 
nobody].”
Variant of this proverb: ignorance of 
the law is no excuse for breaking it.
an ill agreement is better than a good 
judgment  It is better to reach an out-
of-court settlement than to pursue a case 
in court: The old man was disappointed with 
the compensation his rival agreed but reminded 
himself that “an ill agreement is better than 
a good judgment.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1640 in George Herbert’s 
Outlandish Proverbs.
an ill beginning makes an ill ending 
Something that is badly planned or that 
starts badly is unlikely to end well: We 
had problems with transportation and supplies 
in the early stages of the expedition, which 
did not bode well for us—an ill beginning 
makes an ill ending. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1562 in A. Broke’s Romeus 
and Juliet.
an ill bird lays an ill egg  Good things 
rarely result from bad origins: I had hoped 
for a better offer, but the man’s a gangster and 
as they say, “an ill bird lays an ill egg.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1581 in G. 
Pettie’s Guazzo’s Civil Conversation.
ill doers are ill dreaders  See evil doers 
are evil dreaders.
ill-gotten goods never thrive  Some-
thing acquired by dishonest, illegitimate, 
or underhand means—specifi cally, stolen 
money or property—will not bring good 
fortune to the person who acquires it: 
“That ill-gotten gain never prospers . . . is 
the trite consolation administered to the 
easy dupe, when he has been tricked out 
of his money or estate” (Charles Lamb, 
Elia’s Last Essays, 1826). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in the 16th century, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of ancient origin. 
Compare Cicero (106–43 b.c.): “male 
parta, male dilabuntur [things ill gotten slip 
away in evil ways].”
 ill-gotten goods never thrive
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   141 1/29/07   5:12:40 PM
142
Variant of this proverb: ill-gotten 
goods seldom prosper.
an ill master makes an ill servant  See 
like master, like man.
ill news comes apace  See bad news 
travels fast.
ill weeds grow apace  Worthless people 
or evil things have a tendency to fl ourish 
where better ones fail: Ill weeds grow apace, 
and our efforts to stamp out these corrupt prac-
tices were of no avail. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1470 in Anglia, “Wyl[d] weed 
ys sone y-growe” (Wild weed is soon 
grown), but the sentiment it expresses is 
of earlier origin. Compare the 14th-cen-
tury French proverb “Male herbe croist [Bad 
grass thrives].”
an ill wind blows no good  See it’s an ill 
wind that blows nobody any good.
INDIAN PROVERBS
Indian proverbs range from telling observations on such everyday realities as hunger and pov-
erty to thought-provoking wise utterances on spiritual and philosophical themes. They include 
some of the most poetic proverbs to be found anywhere in the world.
Every dog is a tiger in his own street
The heart at rest sees a feast in everything
He who answers is inferior to the one who asks the question
Hunger drives good taste away
If you live on the river, befriend the crocodile
It’s easy to throw something into the river but hard to get it out again
A man laughs at others and weeps for himself
Never stand in front of a judge or behind a donkey
Never use a dwarf to measure the depth of water
No sin is hidden to the soul
One and one sometimes make eleven
One man’s beard is burning, and another warms his hands by it
Only the nightingale understands the rose
Pearls are of no value in a desert
Poverty destroys all virtues
Poverty makes thieves, like love makes poets
Theologians, dogs, and singers always disagree
The voice of the poor has no echo
Turkeys, parrots, and hares don’t know what gratitude is
We admire what we do not understand
What does the blind man know of the beauty of the tulip?
When the bed breaks, there is the ground to lie on
The world fl atters the elephant and tramples on the ant
You do not stumble over a mountain, but you do over a stone
ååååå
an ill master makes an ill servant
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   142 1/29/07   5:12:41 PM
143
imitation is the sincerest form of fl at-
tery  Somebody who copies something 
is paying an indirect compliment, by 
showing that he or she considers the 
original worthy of imitation: On the basis 
that imitation is the sincerest form of fl attery, 
the supermarket should pay extra money to 
the original brand-name owners for the simi-
lar goods they are selling. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1820 without the word 
form, which was not added until the 20th 
century.
Variant of this proverb: imitation is 
the highest form of fl attery.
in a calm sea every man is a pilot  When 
times are easy, everyone wants to be 
in charge: “When winds are steady and 
skies are clear, every hand the ship must 
steer” (D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson). 
The implication is that when things get 
diffi cult these same volunteers will not 
be so eager.
an inch is as good as a mile  See give a 
man an inch and he’ll take a mile.
in for a penny, in for a pound  Once 
you have committed yourself to some-
thing, you might as well do it whole-
heartedly and see it through to the end: I 
began to doubt the wisdom of my chosen course 
of action, but in for a penny, in for a pound. 
Besides, it was probably more dangerous to turn 
back than to go on. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1695 in Edward Ravenscroft’s 
Canterbury Guests.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one might as well be hanged for a 
sheep as for a lamb.
in politics a man must learn to rise above 
principle  A successful politician cannot 
afford to have too many scruples; a cynical 
observation: They say that in politics a man 
must learn to rise above principle, and by his 
second year of offi ce the president had left the 
principles on which he was elected far behind.
interest will not lie  People will do 
more than they would otherwise do if 
they pursue something in which they 
have an interest. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1688 in John Bunyan’s Work 
of Jesus Christ: “Our English proverb is, 
Interest will not lie; interest will make a 
man do what which otherwise he would 
not do.”
in the country of the blind, the one-eyed 
man is king  People of only limited abil-
ity can succeed when surrounded by those 
who are even less able than themselves: I 
had few of the skills required for survival in the 
wild, but my fellow castaways had even fewer, 
and in the country of the blind the one-eyed man 
is king. The proverb is probably of ancient 
origin; in his Adagia (1500) the Dutch 
humanist Desiderius Erasmus quotes the 
Latin proverb “In regione caecorum rex est 
luscus [In the kingdom of the blind the one-
eyed man is king].” H. G. Wells wrote a 
short story, The Country of the Blind (1911), 
in which a man tries and fails to prove the 
literal truth of the proverb in a land popu-
lated by sightless people.
Variant of this proverb: in the land of 
the blind, the one-eyed are kings.
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love  Spring is tra-
ditionally considered to be the time when 
the desire for romance or sex is strongest: 
We often see a distinct increase in our sales of 
contraceptives at this time of year—perhaps 
there is some truth in the saying that in the 
 in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   143 1/29/07   5:12:41 PM
144
spring a young man’s fancy lightly turns to 
thoughts of love! The proverb comes from 
Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s poem “Locksley 
Hall” (1842). Facetious modern variants 
have other words in place of love, such as 
baseball.
into every life a little rain must fall  Ev-
erybody must have his or her share of mis-
fortune; often said in consolation, with the 
implication that such misfortune it is only 
temporary: “Into every life a little rain must 
fall;/And, for sure, it poured down on you.” 
(Ralph McTell, Weather the Storm, 1976). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1935.
Variant of this proverb: into each life 
some rain must fall.
in unity there is strength  See union 
is strength.
in vain the net is spread in the sight of 
the bird  Nobody will fall into a trap if 
he or she is in a position to watch it being 
laid—to catch people out you must be 
both discreet and well-prepared: “‘If they 
come, we shall be ready,’ said Bessas. ‘In 
vain the net is spread in the sight of the 
bird’” (L. Sprague De Camp, The Dragon of 
the Ishtar Gate, 1961). The proverb is of bib-
lical origin: “Surely in vain the net is spread 
in the sight of any bird” (Proverbs 1:17).
in war there is no substitute for vic-
tory  A war is only truly won by total 
defeat of the enemy, not by diplomatic 
negotiations or compromise: The debate 
was evenly divided between those who believed 
that in war there is no substitute for vic-
tory, and those who favored a less belligerent 
approach. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in General Dwight D. Eisenhower’s Letters 
to Mamie (1944), but it is popularly asso-
ciated with General Douglas MacArthur, 
who used it in a speech in 1951.
in wine there is truth  See there’s 
truth in wine.
iron not used soon rusts  See the used 
key is always bright.
IRISH PROVERBS
The Irish are famed for their hospitality 
and a good number of their proverbs 
accordingly refl ect a love of generosity, 
good drink, and entertaining company.
Age is honourable and youth is 
noble
Both your friend and your enemy 
think you will never die
The day will come when the cow 
will have use for her tail
A drink precedes a story
Falling is easier than rising
God’s help is nearer than the door
Good as drink is, it ends in thirst
He who comes with a story to you 
brings two away from you
If you hit my dog you hit myself
It is sweet to drink but bitter to 
pay for
The light heart lives long
There is no fi reside like your own 
fi reside
There is no need like the lack of 
a friend
This is better than the thing we 
never had
Time is a great story teller
Two shorten the road
When the drop is inside, the 
sense is outside
When you are right no one 
remembers; when you are 
wrong no one forgets
Wine divulges truth
Women do not drink liquor, but 
it disappears when they are 
present
ååå
into every life a little rain must fall
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   144 1/29/07   5:12:41 PM
145
it’ll all be the same in a hundred 
years  Trivial problems or mistakes of 
the present moment have no lasting sig-
nifi cance or effect, so there is no point in 
worrying about them; also used to imply 
that there will always be similar problems 
as there are now: “‘It doesn’t matter,’ she 
answered quietly, out of the darkness. ‘I 
am strong enough to suffer, and live. . . . 
It doesn’t matter; it will all be the same 
a hundred years hence’” (Wilkie Collins, 
No Name, 1862). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1611 in the form “All will be 
one at the latter day.”
Variant of this proverb: it’ll all be the 
same a hundred years hence.
it’ll all come out in the wash  All will 
ultimately be satisfactorily resolved: I’m 
up to my ears in debt, my job is hanging by 
a thread, and my wife has just left me, so 
please don’t tell me “It’ll all come out in the 
wash”—how can it? The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in 1612 
in Cervantes’s Don Quixote.
Variant of this proverb: it’ll all come 
right in the wash.
it never rains but it pours  One setback, 
misfortune, or other undesirable occur-
rence is inevitably followed by many 
more; also occasionally used of pleasant 
things, such as a run of good luck: Talk 
ITALIAN PROVERBS
The Italian national character is widely linked with passionate enjoyment of life, and it is thus 
perhaps not surprising that many of their proverbs focus on the subjects of food and love.
Absence is the enemy of love
A cask of wine works more miracles than a church full of saints
Adam must have an Eve to blame for his faults
All are not saints who go to church
Bed is the poor man’s opera
Better one true friend than a hundred relatives
By asking the impossible you will get the best
The end of the pig is the beginning of the sausage
Every excuse is good, if it works
Failures are but mileposts on the road to success
He that is afraid of the devil does not grow rich
If it rained macaroni, what a fi ne time for gluttons!
If you would succeed, you must not be too good
It may be quieter to sleep alone, but not warmer
A kiss without a moustache is like beef without mustard
A meal without wine is like a day without sunshine
Virginity is noted only by its absence
What worth has beauty if it is not seen?
Whoever stays awake longest must blow out the candle
Who has no courage must have legs
You must marry a widow while she is still mourning
ååååå it never rains but it pours
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   145 1/29/07   5:12:41 PM
146
about it never rains but it pours. The children 
have all been ill this week and then the washing 
machine and the drier have both broken down. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1726 in 
the form “It cannot rain but it pours,” the 
title of a book by the Scottish physician 
John Arbuthnot.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
misfortunes never come singly.
I today, you tomorrow  See today you, 
tomorrow me.
it’s a foolish sheep that makes the 
wolf his confessor  Do not confi de in 
somebody unless you are certain that 
he or she can be trusted: I can’t believe 
that you told Maggie, of all people, about 
the missing money—you should have guessed 
she’d go straight to the boss and try to get 
you fi red. It’s a foolish sheep that makes the 
wolf his confessor. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1642 in a collection of Ital-
ian proverbs.
it’s a good horse that never stumbles 
See a stumble may prevent a fall.
it’s all grist for the mill  See all is grist 
that comes to the mill.
it’s all in a day’s work  Unpleasant 
things have to be accepted as part of the 
daily routine; also used to play down a 
major achievement or a heroic act by 
implying that it is just part of your job: 
“The mules merely shook themselves and 
then stared stonily ahead, as if it were all 
in the day’s work” (Francis Edward Youn-
ghusband, The Heart of a Continent, 1896). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1738 
in Jonathan Swift’s A Complete Collection of 
Polite and Ingenious Conversation.
it’s a long road that has no turning  An 
undesirable situation, or a run of bad luck, 
cannot last forever—things are bound to 
improve eventually: They say that it’s a long 
road that has no turning, but the end of our 
problems was not yet in sight. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in the 17th century 
in the form “It’s a long run that never 
turns.”
Variant of this proverb: it’s a long 
lane that has no turning.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: be the day weary or be the day 
long, at last it ringeth to evensong; 
the longest day must have an end.
it’s always darkest before dawn  See the 
darkest hour is just before dawn.
it’s always fair weather when good 
friends get together  The company of 
good friends is a constant source of plea-
sure and happiness: I meet up with a group of 
my old college friends every two or three months, 
and we have a great time. If any of us has prob-
lems, they’re soon forgotten—it’s always fair 
weather when good friends get together.
it’s always the unexpected that hap-
pens  See the unexpected always hap-
pens.
it’s an ill bird that fouls its own nest  You 
should not say or do anything that will bring 
discredit or harm to your own family or 
country: “Nothing . . . can excuse the bad 
taste of Samuel Butler’s virulent attack upon 
his defenceless family. . . . It’s an ill bird that 
fouls its own nest” (London Times, 1926). The 
proverb dates from before 1250.
it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any 
good  There is usually somebody who 
I today, you tomorrow
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   146 1/29/07   5:12:41 PM
147
benefi ts from an unfavorable set of circum-
stances: The collapse of the company was a major 
disaster for employees and stockholders alike, 
but it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any good, 
and some of its competitors were quick to take 
advantage of its demise. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546. It occurs in Shakespeare’s 
play Henry VI, Part 3 (2:5) in the form “Ill 
blows the wind that profi ts nobody.”
Variant of this proverb: an ill wind 
blows no good.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one man’s loss is another man’s gain.
it’s a poor dog that’s not worth whistling 
for  Everybody has some value, or some 
redeeming feature: It’s a poor dog that’s 
not worth whistling for, and I was prepared to 
give him the opportunity to prove himself. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546.
Variant of this proverb: it’s a poor 
dog that deserves not a crust.
it’s a poor heart that never rejoices 
Nobody can be miserable or gloomy 
all the time: “‘Well,’ continued he, ‘it’s 
a poor heart that never rejoiceth.’ He 
then poured out half a tumbler of rum” 
(Captain Marryat, Peter Simple, 1834). The 
quotation is the fi rst recorded use of the 
proverb.
Variant of this proverb: it’s a sad 
heart that never rejoices.
it’s a sad house where the hen crows 
louder than the cock No home can 
be happy where the woman has more 
infl uence than the man: “They are sory 
houses, where the hennes crowe, and 
the cock holdes his peace” (John Florio, 
First Fruites, 1578). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1573 in J. Sandford’s The 
Garden Pleasure.
it’s as cheap sitting as standing  You 
might as well sit down and be comfort-
able, if you have the opportunity, rather 
than standing up: “He returned to Tommie 
Redhill’s car. ‘Jump in, Inspector,’ Tommie 
suggested, opening the door at his side. 
‘It’s as cheap sitting as standing’” (J. J. Con-
nington, The Sweepstake Murders, 1932). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1666.
it’s a sin to steal a pin  Theft is a crime, 
regardless of the size or value of what is 
stolen: It’s a sin to steal a pin, and salesclerks 
who help themselves to candy bars without 
paying for them are just as guilty as one who 
takes a handful of cash from the till. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1875, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
general use, especially as an admonition 
to children.
it’s a small world  It is amazing how 
often you meet somebody you know—
or somebody who knows one of your 
friends or relatives, comes from your 
home town, or went to your school—in 
a distant or unexpected place; said when 
such a coincidence occurs: I was chatting 
with the guy in the next seat on the airplane, 
and it turned out he’d gone to college with my 
best friend—it’s a small world. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in the late 19th century: “Mr. Ardale 
and I have met in London. . . . They say 
the world’s very small, don’t they” (A. W. 
Pinero, The Second Mrs. Tanqueray, 1893).
it’s as well to know which way the wind 
blows  See straws show which way 
the wind blows.
it’s a wise child that knows its own 
father  People cannot always be certain—
 it’s a wise child that knows its own father
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   147 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
148
but sometimes instinctively know—who 
their natural father is: I was devastated to 
learn that my mother’s husband—the man 
who had raised me—had played no part in my 
conception. As they say, it’s a wise child that 
knows its own father. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1584 in the form “Wise sons 
they be in very deed, that know their 
parents who did them breed.” It occurs 
in Shakespeare’s play The Merchant of Ven-
ice (2:2) with the wording reversed: “It is 
a wise father that knows his own child.”
it’s best to be off with the old love 
before you are on with the new  Do not 
embark on a new relationship until your 
old one is over: Remembering the proverb 
“It’s best to be off with the old love before you 
are on with the new,” I decided to make a clean 
break with Laura that evening. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1801, but with the 
implication that it was of earlier origin.
it’s best to be on the safe side  See it’s 
better to be on the safe side.
it’s better to be an hour too early than 
a minute too late  If you arrive far too 
early, as for an appointment or a fl ight you 
can easily fi ll the intervening time, but if 
you arrive just a moment too late, you 
may miss it altogether: “Surely we don’t have 
to go yet—it’s only twenty miles to the coast, 
and the boat doesn’t leave till midday.” “It’s 
better to be an hour too early than a minute 
too late.”
Variant of this proverb: better three 
hours too soon than a minute too late.
it’s better to be born lucky than 
rich  Rich people may lose their money 
and have nothing, but lucky people will 
always be able to get what they want: 
Within six months he had squandered his entire 
inheritance in the casinos of Europe, and was 
forced to acknowledge the truth of the saying 
“It’s better to be born lucky than rich.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 in the 
form “Better to have good fortune than be 
a rich man’s child.”
it’s better to be happy than wise  Hap-
piness is more important than wisdom, 
knowledge, or learning: Don’t put pressure 
on your children to continue their education if 
they are not academically inclined—it’s bet-
ter to be happy than wise. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in John Heywood, 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
it’s better to be on the safe side  It is 
advisable to err on the side of caution 
and avoid unnecessary risk: The wound 
is unlikely to be infected, but I’ll prescribe a 
course of antibiotics, just in case—it’s better 
to be on the safe side. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in 1668 
in John Dryden and William Cavendish 
Newcastle’s, Sir Martin Mar-all.
Variant of this proverb: it’s best to be 
on the safe side.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
better safe than sorry.
it’s better to be right than in the 
majority  Do not follow or side with the 
majority, just for the sake of conformity, 
if you believe them to be wrong: I was the 
only member of the committee to vote in favor 
of the proposal, but I am convinced that it is a 
good thing, and it’s better to be right than in the 
majority. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1691 in John Norris’s Practical Discourses.
it’s better to die on your feet than live 
on your knees  It is better to be killed 
it’s best to be off with the old love before you are on with the new
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   148 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
149
in active resistance, or while fi ghting for 
a cause, than to surrender and condemn 
yourself to a life of servitude: “‘Why don’t 
you use some sense and try to be more like 
me? . . .’ ‘Because it’s better to die on one’s 
feet than to live on one’s knees,’ Nately 
retorted with triumphant and lofty con-
viction” (Joseph Heller, Catch-22, 1961). 
In its current form the proverb is generally 
associated with the Spanish communist 
politician Dolores Ibarruri, who used it 
in a speech in 1936, at the beginning of 
the Spanish Civil War, urging the people 
to resist the fascist forces. The sentiment 
expressed by the proverb, however, is of 
much earlier origin.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
a live dog is better than a dead lion.
it’s better to give than to receive  The 
act of giving is more worthy, noble, 
and spiritually satisfying than the act of 
receiving: “’Tis better to Give than to 
Receive, but yet ’tis Madness to give so 
much Charity to Others, as to become the 
Subject of it our Selves” (Samuel Palmer, 
Moral Essays on Some of the Most Curious 
and Signifi cant English, Scotch, and Foreign 
Proverbs, 1710). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “It is more blessed to give than to 
receive” (Acts 20:35).
Variant of this proverb: it’s more 
blessed to give than to receive.
it’s better to laugh than to cry  It is bet-
ter to see the funny side of an unfortunate 
situation than to distress yourself about it: 
I hurt my shoulder when I fell off the stage, but 
it’s better to laugh than to cry, and the audi-
ence thought it was all part of the show.
it’s better to light one candle than curse 
the darkness  Any positive action, how-
ever small, that helps to improve an unde-
sirable state of affairs is infi nitely better 
than simply bemoaning or complaining 
about it: The charity does what little it can to 
help the victims of persecution and oppression 
around the world, on the basis that it’s bet-
ter to light a candle than curse the darkness. 
Probably of Chinese origin, the proverb 
is the motto of the Christophers, a U.S. 
religious organization founded in 1945. 
In a tribute to Eleanor Roosevelt, after 
her death in 1962, the American politician 
Adlai Stevenson said, “She would rather 
light a candle than curse the darkness, and 
her glow has warmed the world.”
Variant of this proverb: it’s better 
to light one little candle than curse the 
darkness.
it’s better to lose the battle and win 
the war  It is sometimes prudent or 
expedient to concede a minor point in an 
argument or dispute in order to gain the 
overall victory: The protesters were content 
to admit defeat in this particular campaign, 
knowing that their action had forced the 
government to rethink the whole road-build-
ing program statewide. “It’s better to lose the 
battle and win the war,” said a spokesperson 
for the protest group. It is unclear when this 
proverb was fi rst used, but the sentiment 
was expressed by Charles de Gaulle on 
June 18, 1940, when he announced a 
few days after the fall of Paris to the Ger-
mans, “La France a perdu une bataille! Mais 
la France n’a pas perdu la guerre” (France 
has lost a battle, but France has not lost 
the war).
it’s better to travel hopefully than to 
arrive  The expectation of success, or 
the process of working toward this end, 
is often more enjoyable or satisfying than 
 it’s better to travel hopefully than to arrive
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   149 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
150
the actual result: “As much as it was bet-
ter to travel hopefully than to arrive, as 
much as I believed that and had lived by 
it, once you’ve arrived, you’ve arrived, 
and there’s not much to be done about it” 
(Mark Vonnegut, The Eden Express, 1975). 
The proverb comes from Robert Louis 
Stevenson’s Virginibus Puerisque (1881): “To 
travel hopefully is a better thing than to 
arrive, and the true success is to labour.”
it’s dogged as does it  Anything can be 
done with determination and persever-
ance: “There ain’t nowt a man can’t bear 
if he’ll only be dogged. . . . It’s dogged as 
does it. It’s not thinking about it” (Anthony 
Trollope, The Last Chronicle of Barset, 1867). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1864 in 
M. B. Chesnut’s Diary.
it’s easier to tear down than to build 
up  It is easier to destroy something, 
such as a building or an idea, than it is 
to construct or restore it: The overthrow 
of the monarchy was accomplished with ease, 
and relatively little bloodshed, but the creation 
of the new republic proved to be rather more 
diffi cult. As the revolutionaries discovered, it’s 
always far easier to tear down than to build up. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1577 
in the form “It is easy to raze, but hard 
to build.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: a jackass can kick a barn door 
down, but it takes a carpenter to 
build one.
it’s easy to be wise after the event  With 
hindsight it is easy to see why something 
went wrong or what should have been 
done, but this is of no practical purpose: 
“It is easy to be wise after the event, but it 
does certainly appear that . . . the action 
at Paardeberg was as unnecessary as it was 
expensive” (Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, The 
Great Boer War, 1900). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1616, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t shut the barn door after the 
horse is stolen.
it’s easy to fi nd a stick to beat a dog  It 
is easy to fi nd some reason or excuse to 
justify a critical attack or a harsh punish-
ment: “Excuses were abundant. . . . It 
is easy to fi nd a stick to beat a sick dog” 
(Samuel Smiles, Thrift, 1875). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1564. The English 
popular historian Philip Guedalla wrote 
punningly in Masters and Men (1923), “Any 
stigma, as the old saying is, will serve to 
beat a dogma.”
Variants of this proverb: any stick 
will serve to beat a dog with; he who 
has a mind to beat a dog will easily fi nd 
a stick.
it’s good fi shing in troubled waters  It 
is sometimes possible to take advantage 
of other people’s diffi culties in times 
of confl ict: “Thinking it (as the proverb 
saith) best fi shing in troubled waters” (Sir 
John Harington, Orlando Furioso, 1591). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1568 in 
Richard Grafton’s Chronicles.
it’s good to make a bridge of gold to a 
fl ying enemy  Retreating enemies will 
kill or destroy anybody or anything that 
stands in their way, so it is advisable to 
give them free passage: Countless lives 
could have been spared if the general had 
paid heed to the military saying “It’s good to 
make a bridge of gold to a fl ying enemy.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
it’s dogged as does it
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   150 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
151
1576, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
ancient origin.
it’s hard to live in Rome and strive 
against the Pope  See it’s ill sitting at 
rome and striving with the pope.
it’s idle to swallow the cow and choke 
on the tail  Once you have completed 
the major part of an enterprise or under-
taking, it is foolish not to see it through 
to the end: “We had gone too far to turn 
back, and as our proverb says, ‘It is idle to 
swallow the cow and choke on the tail’” 
(John Buchan, Salute to Adventurers, 1915). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1659 in 
James Howell’s Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: don’t swal-
low the cow and worry with the tail.
it’s ill jesting with edged tools  Do not 
trifl e with dangerous things or people: 
Taking drugs like these for “recreational” pur-
poses is a risky business—it’s ill jesting with 
edged tools. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1588 in Robert Greene’s Pandosto.
Variant of this proverb: don’t play 
with edged tools.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you play with fire, you get burned.
it’s ill sitting at Rome and striving with 
the Pope  It is foolish or pointless to 
quarrel or fi ght with somebody who has 
supreme power in the place where you 
are: “‘It is ill sitting at Rome and striving 
with the Pope.’ Nebuchadnezzar’s palace 
was not precisely the place to dispute with 
Nebuchadnezzar” (Alexander MacLaren, 
Ezekiel, 1908). The proverb dates from 
before 1628.
Variant of this proverb: it’s hard to 
live in Rome and strive against the Pope.
it’s ill speaking between a full man and 
a fasting  Hungry people are not on the 
best of terms with those who have eaten 
their fi ll: “It’s ill speaking between a full 
man and a fasting, but two fasting men 
are worse at a crack” (John Buchan, The 
Free Fishers, 1934). The proverb dates from 
before 1641.
it’s ill striving against the stream  See 
strive not against the stream.
it’s ill waiting for dead men’s shoes  It 
is not good to be impatiently awaiting 
somebody’s death or retirement to get 
what you want, such as an inheritance or 
promotion: She’s fi rst in line for Jack Mitch-
ell’s job at the head of the New York offi ce, but 
he’s still eight years from retirement, and it’s 
ill waiting for dead men’s shoes. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1530.
Variant of this proverb: he that waits 
for dead men’s shoes may go a long time 
barefoot.
it’s merry in hall when beards wag all  A 
social gathering with many people talking 
together is a happy, convivial affair: It’s 
merry in hall when beards wag all, and the 
noise in the room had reached such a pitch 
that I had to bang loudly on the table to gain 
everybody’s attention. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1300.
it’s more blessed to give than to 
receive  See it’s better to give than 
to receive.
it’s never too late to learn  Nobody is 
too old to acquire knowledge or expe-
rience: “‘It is never too late to learn,’ 
cried he. ‘I will make a fi sherman of you 
in no time, if you will only attend to my 
 it’s never too late to learn
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   151 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
152
 directions’” (Wilkie Collins, After Dark, 
1856). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1678 in the form “It is never too 
late to learn what it is always necessary 
to know.” Its variant form is of earlier 
origin.
Variant of this proverb: never too 
old to learn.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: you can’t teach an old dog new 
tricks.
it’s never too late to mend  People or 
things can be reformed or improved at 
any time: The Church’s message to habitual 
criminals is “It’s never too late to mend.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1590 as the 
title of a pamphlet by the English drama-
tist Robert Greene.
it’s not over till it’s over  Do not antici-
pate the end of something; specifi cally, do 
not give up hope until you have actually 
lost or failed: “Beré won’t say whether 
the company is better off than if it had 
never done the LBO [leveraged buyout]. 
Nor will he declare that the company’s 
problems are behind it: ‘It isn’t over until 
it’s over’” (Fortune, 1991). The proverb 
is attributed to the baseball player Yogi 
Berra (1925–  ), referring to a baseball 
game.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the opera ain’t over till the fat lady 
sings.
it’s not spring until you can plant your 
foot upon twelve daisies  According to 
country lore, spring has not arrived until 
there are so many daisies in fl ower that 
you can tread on twelve at once: Today is 
offi cially the fi rst day of spring, but I won’t be 
putting my winter clothes away just yet—my 
grandmother used to say, “It’s not spring until 
you can plant your foot upon twelve daisies,” 
and there’s not a daisy to be seen on any of 
my neighbors’ lawns. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1863, but with the implica-
tion that it was already in general use. 
Different versions have different numbers 
of daisies, such as nine or six, but the type 
of fl ower remains the same.
it’s not the end of the world  Things 
are not as disastrous as they seem; said in 
reassurance, such as after a minor mishap: 
It looks as though we’re going to miss our 
fl ight, but it’s not the end of the world.
it’s not the size of the dog in the fi ght, 
it’s the size of the fi ght in the dog  In 
any combat or dispute, strength and deter-
mination to win are more important than 
physical size or number: It’s not the size of 
the dog in the fi ght, it’s the size of the fi ght in 
the dog—the protesters were in the minority, 
but they conducted such a powerful and persis-
tent campaign that they eventually won their 
case. The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
it’s not what you know but who you 
know  Infl uential contacts can be more 
useful than qualifi cations or experience; 
often said cynically by those who fail to 
get a job, assignment, or promotion for 
this reason: The other candidate had never 
worked in marketing before, but her uncle is 
president of one of the company’s biggest cus-
tomers, so of course she got the job—it’s not 
what you know, but who you know.
it’s not what you say but how you say 
it  Phraseology and style are often more 
important than the actual content of 
speech or writing: “As one . . . researcher 
it’s never too late to mend
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   152 1/29/07   5:12:42 PM
153
explains: ‘It’s not just what they say, it’s 
how they say it. When people talk about 
“change,” what words do they use?’” (New 
York Times Magazine, 1992).
it’s not whether you win or lose, but how 
you play the game  In any contest, play-
ing well and fairly is more important than 
winning: “Exactly what is sportsmanship 
these days? Is it the age-old admonish-
ment that ‘It’s not whether you win or 
lose but how you play the game?’ Or 
is it Vince Lombardi’s rubric that win-
ning isn’t everything, it’s the only thing?” 
(New York Times, 1991). The proverb comes 
from “Alumnus Football” (1941), by the 
U.S. sportswriter Grantland Rice: “For 
when the One Great Scorer comes to 
mark against your name,/He writes—
not that you won or lost—but how you 
played the game.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: winning isn’t everything, it’s the 
only thing.
it’s not work that kills, but worry  Anxi-
ety is more injurious to your health than 
overwork: It’s not work that kills, but worry, 
so those who have lost their jobs and can’t 
afford to feed their families are theoretically 
more at risk than those who are working a 60-
hour week to hang on to the jobs they have. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1879.
Variant of this proverb: worry kills 
more men than work.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: care is no cure; care killed the 
cat.
it’s no use crying over spilled milk  Do 
not distress yourself about mistakes or mis-
fortunes that cannot be put right: “I wish 
now I’d thought about the implications, but 
it’s no good crying over spilt milk” (Jona-
than Gash, The Gondola Scam, 1984). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1659 in the 
form “No weeping for shed milk.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t cry 
over spilled milk.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what’s done cannot be undone.
it’s six of one and half a dozen of the 
other  There is no difference between 
two options or parties: Tom blamed Sarah 
for starting the fi ght, but as far as I could 
tell it was six of one and half a dozen of the 
other. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1836, in Captain Marryat’s novel The 
Pirate: “I never know the children. It’s 
just six of one and half-a-dozen of the 
other.”
it’s the fi rst step that is diffi cult  See 
the first step is the hardest.
it’s the last straw that breaks the camel’s 
back  When somebody is close to his 
or her limit of patience or endurance, it 
takes only one little extra thing to make 
the whole load too much to bear: “As 
the last straw breaks the laden camel’s 
back, this piece of underground infor-
mation crushed the sinking spirits of 
Mr. Dombey” (Charles Dickens, Dombey 
and Son, 1848). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1655 in the form “The last 
feather may be said to break a horse’s 
back.” In modern times it is most fre-
quently encountered in the form of the 
cliché the last straw.
Variant of this proverb: the last straw 
will break the camel’s back.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the last drop makes the cup run 
over.
 it’s the last straw that breaks the camel’s back
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   153 1/29/07   5:12:43 PM
154
it’s the pace that kills  Do not try to 
do too much too quickly: If you want to 
enjoy a long and happy life, you must learn 
to slow down and relax more. Remember, it’s 
the pace that kills! The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1855, with the implication 
that it was already well known in the 
sporting world.
it’s too late to shut the stable door after 
the horse has bolted  See don’t shut 
the barn door after the horse is 
stolen.
it takes a heap of living to make a house 
a home  A house or apartment does 
not feel like home until you lived there 
happily and comfortably for some time: 
It takes a heap of living to make a house a 
home—an interior designer can make it look 
good, but only you and your family can make 
it feel good. The proverb comes from the 
poem “Home” (1916) by Edgar Guest.
Variant of this proverb: it takes a 
heap of living to make a home.
it takes all kinds of people to make 
a world  Other people have different 
ways, tastes, and so on—we must practice 
tolerance and respect their individuality: 
“‘Hines was not exactly a weak sister, but 
he was sort of nondescript. I can’t imag-
ine his appealing to your wife.’ ‘It takes 
all sorts of people to make a world. You 
can never tell who is going to appeal to 
whom’” (Erle Stanley Gardner, The Case of 
the Borrowed Brunette, 1946). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1620, in a translation 
of Cervantes’s Don Quixote.
Variant of this proverb: it takes all 
sorts to make a world.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
live and let live.
it takes a thief to catch a thief  See set 
a thief to catch a thief.
it takes a village to raise a child  The 
whole community plays a part in the 
upbringing of the children that live there: 
It takes a village to raise a child, and par-
ents cannot take all the blame—or all the 
credit—for the way their kids turn out. Of 
African origin, the proverb was popular-
ized by Hillary Clinton, wife of President 
Bill Clinton, in the mid-1990s.
it takes money to make money  Any 
moneymaking scheme requires some cap-
ital investment: I’d like to set up in business 
on my own, but it takes money to make money, 
and I don’t have any.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money begets money.
it takes one to know one  Only those 
with similar fl aws are capable of spotting 
them in others: “I told him he was a liar and 
a cheat. He said it took one to know one” 
(Abigail Van Buren, The Best of Dear Abby, 
1981). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
around the end of the 19th century.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
set a thief to catch a thief.
it takes three generations to make a 
gentleman  You cannot consider your-
self a member of the gentry if your 
parents or grandparents were members 
of the common people: “You will fi nd it 
no easy matter to make a gentleman of 
him. The old proverb says, that ‘it takes 
three generations to make a gentleman’” 
(James Fenimore Cooper, The Pioneers, 
1823). The quotation is the fi rst recorded 
use of the proverb, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of much earlier origin.
it’s the pace that kills
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   154 1/29/07   5:12:43 PM
155
it takes two to make a bargain  A deal 
or treaty cannot stand unless both par-
ties are—and remain—in agreement: “I 
thought we’d agreed that I’d pay for the 
gasoline and you’d pay for the food.”  “No—you 
suggested it, but I didn’t say yes. It takes two 
to make a bargain.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1597 in the form “The second 
word makes the bargain.”
Variant of this proverb: if it takes two 
to make a bargain, it takes two to break it.
it takes two to make a quarrel  Neither 
party to an argument or dispute can be 
held individually responsible for causing 
it: Don’t let her provoke you—remember, it 
takes two to make a quarrel. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1706 in J. Stevens’s A 
New Spanish and English Dictionary.
Variant of this proverb: it takes two 
to make a quarrel, but one can end it.
it takes two to tango  In a situation 
involving cooperation or joint action, 
both participants must work together and 
share the responsibility for what happens: 
“Despite all the problems I had had with 
Imlach, and believe it or not I realize 
it takes two to tango, I wouldn’t have 
missed playing in the best league in the 
world” (B. Conacher, Hockey in Canada, 
1972). The proverb was popularized as 
the title of a song written by Al Hoffman 
and Dick Manning in 1952.
 it takes two to tango
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   155 1/29/07   5:12:43 PM
ååå   å
156
a jackass can kick a barn door down, but 
it takes a carpenter to build one  Some-
thing that has taken time, skill, and effort 
to put together can be quickly ruined or 
destroyed by a foolish person: “. . . ‘any 
jackass can kick a barn door down, but it 
takes a carpenter to build one.’ Maybe the 
only sure answer to this sort of irrespon-
sibility . . . is for those who run the media 
to insure that there are more carpenters 
among today’s political commentators” 
(New York Times, 1994). The proverb was 
coined by Sam Rayburn (1882–1961), 
Speaker of the House of Representatives, 
in 1953.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: it’s easier to tear down than to 
build up.
a jack of all trades is master of 
none  Somebody who has a very wide 
range of abilities or skills usually does not 
excel at any of them: We encourage our stu-
dents to specialize at an early age, on the basis 
that a jack of all trades is master of none. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1732 in the 
form “A jack of all trades is of no trade.” It 
is perhaps most frequently encountered in 
the form of the cliché a jack of all trades.
Jack’s as good as his master  All people 
are fundamentally equal, and having a 
higher rank or status does not make one 
person better than another: “She was far 
from thinking Jack as good as his master 
and explained failure in plebeian upstarts 
by saying with suave contempt: ‘Well, 
what can you expect? Wasn’t bred to 
power’” (Winifred Holtby, South Riding, 
1936). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1706, in a Spanish/English dictionary, in 
the form “Peter is as good as his master.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: all men are created equal; when 
adam delved and eve span, who was 
then the gentleman?
jam tomorrow and jam yesterday, but 
never jam today Good times always 
seem to belong to the past or to the 
future, but never to the present: She 
promised us she would pay us more when 
things improved, but with her it’s always “jam 
tomorrow.” The proverb appears to have 
made its fi rst appearance in Through the 
Looking-Glass (1871) by Lewis Carroll: 
“‘The rule is, jam to-morrow and jam 
yesterday—but never jam to-day.’ ‘It must 
come sometimes to “jam to-day,”’ Alice 
objected. ‘No, it can’t,’ said the Queen.”
jesters do oft prove prophets  A predic-
tion made in jest often comes true: I was only 
joking when I said that Tom and Jenny, who never 
j.
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   156 1/29/07   5:12:43 PM
157
stopped arguing, were bound to end up marrying 
each other, but jesters do oft prove prophets, and 
I’ve just received an invitation to their wedding. 
The proverb comes from Shakespeare’s play 
King Lear (5:3) in the words of Regan: “Jest-
ers do oft prove prophets.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
many a true word is spoken in jest.
a journey of a thousand miles begins 
with one step  Do not be put off by the 
magnitude of the task ahead of you—the 
important thing is to make a start: As they 
set out from home on their round-the-world 
trip they recalled the proverb “A journey of 
a thousand miles begins with one step.” The 
proverb is attributed to the Chinese phi-
losopher Lao-tzu (c. 604–c. 531 b.c.), 
founder of Taoism.
Variant of this proverb: the longest 
journey begins with a single step.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the first step is the hardest.
Jove but laughs at lovers’ perjury  The 
breaking of oaths and promises made 
JAPANESE PROVERBS
Many Japanese proverbs convey mystical notions about personal character and happiness, 
although others are fi rmly rooted in a more pragmatic world, in which hunger and mothers-
in-law are two misfortunes to be approached with proverbial caution.
Advertising is the mother of trade
A bath refreshes the body, tea refreshes the mind
Better to wash an old kimono than borrow a new one
Character can be built on daily routine
The character of a man lies not in his body but in his soul
Flattery is the best persuader of people
Growing rice gives you more than poetry will
The lotus fl ower blooms in the mud
The most beautiful fl owers fl ourish in the shade
Never rely on the glory of the morning or the smiles of your mother-in-law
One joy can drive away a hundred sorrows
One moment of intense happiness prolongs life by a thousand years
A pig used to dirt turns its nose up at rice
The prettiest of shoes makes a sorry hat
Time spent laughing is time spent with the gods
Too much politeness is impertinent
To the starving man the beauty of Fujiyama has no meaning
Truthful words are seldom pleasant
Unhappiness can be a bridge to happiness
Unspoken words are the fl owers of silence
You have to bow a few times before you can stand upright
You should climb Mount Fujiyama once in your life. Climb it twice and you’re a fool
ååååå Jove but laughs at lovers’ perjury
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   157 1/29/07   5:12:43 PM
158
by lovers is so commonplace that it 
is not regarded as a serious matter: 
“Perjury in the Divorce Court has been 
openly permitted to the upper classes 
for many years, following the maxim 
. . . that ‘Jove but laughs at lovers’ per-
jury’” (London Evening Standard, 1922). 
Of ancient origin, the proverb occurs in 
the writings of the Roman poet Tibullus 
(c. 48–19 b.c.): “periuria ridet amantum 
Iuppiter [Jupiter laughs at lovers’ perju-
ries].” It is also found in Shakespeare’s 
play Romeo and Juliet (2:2) “At lovers’ 
perjuries,/They say, Jove laughs” and in 
John Dryden’s poem Palamon and Arcite 
(1700): “Fool, not to know that love 
endures no tie,/And Jove but laughs at 
lovers’ perjury.”
the joy of the heart makes the face 
fair  See a merry heart makes a cheer-
ful countenance.
judge and you shall be judged  See 
judge not, that ye be not judged.
judge not, that ye be not judged  If 
you make a habit of judging and criticiz-
ing others, they will subject you to the 
same treatment in return: She’s not the best 
player in the team, but we all have our faults. 
“Judge not, that ye be not judged,” is my motto. 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Judge 
not, that ye be not judged. For with what 
judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: 
and with what measure ye mete, it shall 
be measured to you again” (Matthew 
7:1–2).
Variant of this proverb: judge and 
you shall be judged.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: people who live in glass houses 
shouldn’t throw stones.
judge not according to appearances 
Do not make a judgment about some-
thing or somebody on the basis of out-
ward appearance alone: “She wore . . . 
every appearance of innocence, but in her 
person she illustrated the truth of the old 
adage that one should not judge by appear-
ances” (M. Williams, Leaves of a Life, 1890). 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Judge 
not according to the appearance, but 
judge righteous judgment” (John 7:24).
Variant of this proverb: never judge 
by appearances.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: appearances are deceiving; the 
cowl does not make the monk; don’t 
judge a book by its cover; a good 
horse cannot be of a bad color.
justice is blind  Justice must be dis-
pensed with objectivity and without 
regard to irrelevant details or circum-
stances: “Justice is supposed to be blind; 
the color of a person’s skin should not 
determine their guilt or innocence” (Oli-
ver L. North, Under Fire, 1991). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1663 in John 
Dryden’s The Wild Gallant.
the joy of the heart makes the face fair
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   158 1/29/07   5:12:43 PM
ååå   å
159
keep a thing seven years and you’ll fi nd 
a use for it  An object that seems useless 
now may be just what you need at some 
future time, so do not discard it: I have 
a drawer full of odds and ends that I cannot 
bring myself to throw away, on the basis that if 
you keep a thing seven years you’ll fi nd a use 
for it. The proverb was fi rst recorded, with 
different wording, in 1566 in William 
Painter’s Palace of Pleasure.
Variant of this proverb: keep a thing 
seven years and it’s bound to come in 
handy.
keep no more cats than will catch 
mice  Do not support any members of 
your family or household who cannot earn 
their keep: The new president’s policy is to keep 
no more cats than will catch mice, so some of the 
less productive members of staff are likely to lose 
their jobs. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1673 in J. Dare’s Counsellor Manners.
keep your eyes wide open before mar-
riage, half shut afterward  You should 
choose your husband or wife with care, 
but be prepared to overlook his or her 
faults after the wedding day: They say that 
you should keep your eyes wide open before 
marriage and half shut afterward, but there 
are limits to what even the most tolerant wife 
will put up with. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1738, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
keep your mouth shut and your eyes 
open  A recipe for success in many walks 
of life is to speak only when necessary and 
to remain alert, observant, and watch-
ful at all times: On your fi rst day at work, 
remember the proverb “Keep your mouth shut 
and your eyes open”—don’t say anything that 
could land you in trouble, and pay attention 
to everything that’s going on around you. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, in its variant 
form, in 1581.
Variant of this proverb: keep your 
mouth shut and your ears open.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
hear all, see all, say nowt.
keep your shop and your shop will keep 
you  If you run a business effi ciently, the 
profi ts will provide you with a comfort-
able income: Whenever anybody accused him 
of paying more attention to his business than to 
his family, my uncle would argue that he had 
his family’s interests at heart, on the basis of 
the saying “Keep your shop and your shop will 
keep you.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1605. The U.S. actress Mae West paro-
died the proverb when she said “Keep a 
diary and some day it’ll keep you” in the 
movie Every Day’s a Holiday (1937).
k
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   159 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
160
killing no murder Sometimes circum-
stances make extreme actions forgiv-
able: Her grandfather appeared to be of the 
opinion that when it came to politicians and 
journalists it was a case of  “killing no murder.” 
The proverb fi rst appeared as the title of 
the Royalist pamphlet Killing Noë Murder 
(1657), which called for the assassination 
of the Lord Protector, Oliver Cromwell.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
desperate diseases must have desperate 
remedies.
kind hearts are more than coronets 
Kindness and compassion are of greater 
value than noble birth: She discovered 
a number of aristocratic ancestors in her 
genealogical research, but her husband was 
not impressed. “Kind hearts are more than 
coronets,” he said. The proverb comes from 
Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s poem “Lady 
Clara Vere de Vere” (1833): “Howe’er 
it be, it seems to me,/’Tis only noble 
to be good,/Kind hearts are more than 
coronets,/And simple faith than Nor-
man blood.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: better a good cow than a cow of 
good kind.
the king can do no wrong  People in 
authority are not bound by the rules and 
regulations that apply to others; specifi -
cally, a monarch is above the law: If one of 
us had made such a careless and potentially 
dangerous mistake, we would have faced dis-
missal, but he’s the boss, and the king can do 
no wrong. The proverb dates from before 
1654 and is a translation of the Latin 
legal maxim “Rex no potest peccare.” The 
word king may be replaced by queen, with 
specifi c reference to a female monarch, 
or by the name of some other person or 
institution considered to be exempt from 
punishment or criticism.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: nobody is above the law.
kings have long arms  Few people, 
places, or things are beyond the reach of 
those in authority, and it is not easy for 
an offender to escape capture or punish-
ment: Even if you manage to get across the 
border, your safety is not guaranteed—kings 
have long arms, you know. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1539, but 
the sentiment it expresses dates back 
to ancient times. Compare Ovid (43 
b.c.–a.d. 18): “an nescis longas regibus esse 
manus? [know you not that kings have far-
reaching hands?]”
Variant of this proverb: governments 
have long arms.
kissing goes by favor  People often 
bestow honors and privileges on those 
they like, rather than on those who are 
most worthy of them: She was probably the 
least suitable candidate for the post, but kissing 
goes by favor, and nobody was surprised to hear 
that she had been appointed. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1616 in Thomas 
Draxe’s Adages.
knock on wood  See touch wood.
knowledge and timber shouldn’t be much 
used until they are seasoned  Knowl-
edge is not useful until it is tempered by 
experience: Newly qualifi ed police offi cers 
can be a danger to themselves and to the 
general public unless they remember the say-
ing “Knowledge and timber shouldn’t be much 
used until they are seasoned.” The proverb 
comes from Oliver Wendell Holmes’s The 
Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table (1858).
killing no murder
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   160 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
161
knowledge and wisdom are far from 
being one  Knowledgeable people may 
lack the wisdom to make sound judg-
ments: One might expect such scholarly and 
learned members of society to behave with a 
little more common sense, but knowledge and 
wisdom are far from being one. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1783.
knowledge is power  Those who have 
knowledge can control or infl uence those 
who do not; sometimes used of a specifi c 
piece of information that gives one person 
an advantage over others: “Of a truth, 
Knowledge is power, but it is a power 
reined by scruple, having a conscience of 
what must be and what may be” (George 
Eliot, Daniel Deronda, 1876). The proverb is 
often attributed to the English philosopher 
Francis Bacon, who wrote “Knowledge 
itself is power” in his Religious Meditations 
(1597). The sentiment it expresses, how-
ever, is of biblical origin: “A man of knowl-
edge increaseth strength” (Proverbs 24:5).
know thyself  Be aware of your own 
strengths and weaknesses: “Know then 
thyself, presume not God to scan;/The 
proper study of Mankind is Man” (Alex-
ander Pope, Essay on Man, 1732). The 
proverb dates from the sixth century b.c., 
when it was inscribed in Greek on the 
temple of Apollo at Delphi. It was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1387.
 know thyself
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   161 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
ååå   å
162
the laborer is worthy of his hire  Those 
who work for others are entitled to be paid 
for their efforts: “Your service will not be 
altogether gratuitous, my old friend—the 
labourer is worthy of his hire” (Sir Walter 
Scott, St. Ronan’s Well, 1824). The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “And in the same 
house remain, eating and drinking such 
things as they give: for the labourer is 
worthy of his hire” (Luke 10:7).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good dog deserves a good bone.
the larger the body, the bigger the 
heart  Large people are reputed to be 
kinder and more generous than others: 
He was a smiling, rosy-cheeked mountain of a 
man, dearly loved by all who knew him, and a 
walking illustration of the proverb “The larger 
the body, the bigger the heart.” The proverb 
is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the best things come in small 
packages.
last but not least  A person or thing 
that is not any the less important because 
listed last: “Though last, not least in 
love” (William Shakespeare, Julius Caesar). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1580 
in John Lyly’s Euphuist and his England: 
“Of these three but one can stand me in 
steede, the last, but not the least.”
the last drop makes the cup run 
over  One fi nal additional thing may 
push a person beyond his or her limit 
of tolerance or endurance: The last drop 
makes the cup run over, and when they asked 
me to cut down the tree because it was casting 
a shadow on their children’s play area, my 
patience fi nally snapped. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1855, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier ori-
gin. In his Church History of Britain (1655), 
Thomas Fuller wrote, “When the Cup is 
brim full before, the last (though least) 
superadded drop is charged alone to be 
the cause of all the running over.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s the last straw that breaks the 
camel’s back.
the last straw will break the camel’s 
back  See it’s the last straw that 
breaks the camel’s back.
late children, early orphans  Children 
born to older parents run a greater risk of 
being orphaned before they reach adult-
hood: She disapproved of our decision to 
have another baby, quoting the proverb “Late 
children, early orphans,” but I pointed out that 
l
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   162 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
163
human life expectancy had increased consider-
ably since the saying was coined.
laugh and grow fat  Cheerfulness and 
merrymaking are good for your health: 
Those seeking a recipe for a long, happy, 
healthy life need look no further than the old 
saying “Laugh and grow fat.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1596 in Sir John 
Harington’s Metamorphosis of Ajax.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
laughter is the best medicine.
laugh and the world laughs with you, 
weep and you weep alone  Cheerful 
people never lack company, but miserable 
people are shunned by others: A happy face 
often hides a sorrowful heart—most people learn 
at an early age the wisdom of the proverb “Laugh 
and the world laughs with you, weep and you 
weep alone.” The current form of the proverb 
comes from Ella Wheeler Wilcox’s poem 
Solitude (1883): “Laugh, and the world 
laughs with you;/Weep, and you weep 
alone./For the sad old earth must borrow 
its mirth,/But has trouble enough of its 
own.” The sentiment it expresses, however, 
is found in the writings of the Roman poet 
Horace (65–8 b.c.): “ut ridentibus arrident, 
ita fl entibus adsunt humani voltus [men’s faces 
laugh on those who laugh, and correspond-
ingly weep on those who weep].”
laugh before breakfast, cry before sunset 
See sing before breakfast, cry before 
night.
laughter is the best medicine  Laughing 
is an excellent remedy for disorders of 
the body or mind: She belongs to a group of 
performers who visit local hospitals to entertain 
the patients with humorous sketches, on the 
basis that laughter is the best medicine.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
laugh and grow fat.
lawmakers should not be lawbreakers 
Legislators should abide by the laws they 
make: Lawmakers should not be lawbreakers—
congressmen and congresswomen are expected 
to set an example to their fellow citizens. The 
fi rst recorded use is c. 1386 in Geoffrey 
Chaucer’s Man of Law’s Tale.
laws go as kings like  Laws are made by 
those in power: The opposition can complain 
as much as they like, but laws go as kings like. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1885 in 
J. Ormsby’s Quixote.
learn from the mistakes of others  Ob-
serve the mistakes that other people 
make and try not to repeat them your-
self: The best way to succeed in this com-
petitive world is not to do something before 
anybody else, but to learn from the mistakes 
of others and do it better than everybody else. 
The sentiment expressed by the proverb 
is of ancient origin: the Roman dramatist 
Plautus (c. 254–184 b.c.) wrote, “Feliciter 
is sapit qui periculo alieno sapit [He is happy 
in his wisdom, who is wise at the expense 
of another].”
Variant of this proverb: Wise men 
learn by other men’s mistakes, fools by 
their own.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
experience is the teacher of fools.
learning is better than house or 
land  Education and knowledge are of 
greater value than property ownership: 
Learning is better than house or land, and my 
parents saw to it that I had suffi cient schooling 
to make up for my lack of inherited wealth. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1773, 
 learning is better than house or land
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   163 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
164
in David Garrick’s prologue to Oliver 
Goldsmith’s play She Stoops to Conquer.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: when house and land are gone 
and spent, then learning is most 
excellent.
least said, soonest mended  The less you 
say, the less likely you are to cause trou-
ble; often used to discourage somebody 
from complaining, apologizing, arguing, 
or making excuses: “If you defend, you’ll 
have to go up to London. In the box, 
least said is soonest mended. You’ll sim-
ply say you found you were mistaken, 
and thought it more honourable to break 
off at once than to go on” (John Gals-
worthy, A Feud, 1930). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, c. 
1460. It was parodied by the U.S. writer 
Ambrose Bierce in his Devil’s Dictionary 
(1911): “Least said is soonest disavowed.”
Variant of this proverb: the least said 
is the easiest mended.
leave no stone unturned  Leave no pos-
sibility unchecked: The police left no stone 
unturned looking for evidence. The proverb 
appears in the writings of Euripedes and 
Pliny and was first recorded in English 
c. 1550 in Dice-Play.
leave off while the play is good  See quit 
while you are ahead.
leave well enough alone  Do not try to 
change or improve something that is sat-
isfactory as it stands: “‘I’m going to him,’ 
Nicole got to her knees. ‘No, you’re not,’ 
said Tommy, pulling her down fi rmly. ‘Let 
well enough alone’” (F. Scott Fitzgerald, 
Tender Is the Night, 1934). The proverb is 
of ancient origin.
Variant of this proverb: let well 
alone.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.
lend your money and lose your 
friend  You risk losing your friends 
by lending them money, either because 
they fail to repay the loan or because 
they resent being asked to repay it: It’s 
not that I don’t want to help you out of 
your fi nancial crisis, and it’s not that I don’t 
have the money, but I value your friendship 
too highly. Have you never heard the saying 
“Lend your money and lose your friend”? The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with differ-
ent wording, in 1474. Similar advice is 
to be found in Shakespeare’s play Hamlet 
(1:3), “Neither a borrower not a lender 
be;/For loan oft loses both itself and 
friend.”
Variant of this proverb: Lend money 
and you get an enemy.
length begets loathing  Nobody likes a 
long-winded speaker or writer: Remember 
that length begets loathing, and keep your 
opening remarks short and to the point. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1742 in C. 
Jarvis’s Don Quixote.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
brevity is the soul of wit.
the leopard can’t change its spots  A 
person cannot change his or her char-
acter or nature: “Although he swears 
he has changed, leopards don’t usually 
change their spots, especially those who 
don’t cooperate in counseling” (Washing-
ton Times, 1997). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “Can the Ethiopian change his 
skin, or the leopard his spots?” (Jeremiah 
13:23).
least said, soonest mended
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   164 1/29/07   5:12:44 PM
165
Variant of this proverb: The leopard 
does not change his spots.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
once a thief, always a thief; you can 
drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back.
less is more  A work of art, piece of 
writing, or other creative endeavor can be 
made more elegant or effective by reduc-
ing ornamentation and avoiding excess: 
Her motto was “Less is more,” and the simple 
lines of the furniture she designed began a 
new trend for minimalism. The proverb is 
associated with the U.S. architect Ludwig 
Mies van der Rohe (1886–1969) but was 
not coined by him: it was fi rst recorded 
in English in Robert Browning’s poem 
“Andrea del Sarto” (1855).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the half is better than the whole.
let bygones be bygones  Put the past 
behind you, make a fresh start, and do 
not bear grudges against those who have 
wronged you: “Into every real friendship 
a little rain must fall. . . . Let’s go and get 
the men and drink a friendship cup and 
let bygones be bygones” (John Cheever, 
The Wapshot Chronicle, 1957). The prov-
erb dates from before 1577 in the form 
“Bygones to be bygones.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: forgive and forget.
let him who is without sin cast the fi rst 
stone  Only those who are truly virtu-
ous have the right to criticize or condemn 
others; used to imply that nobody has this 
right: I accept that what she did was wrong, 
but most of us have done similar things in our 
time—let him who is without sin cast the fi rst 
stone. The proverb is of biblical origin: “He 
that is without sin among you, let him 
fi rst cast a stone at her [a woman taken in 
adultery]” ( John 8:7).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
nobody is perfect.
let not the sun go down on your 
wrath  See never let the sun go down 
on your anger.
let sleeping dogs lie  Do not cause trou-
ble by disturbing a stable—but potentially 
problematic—situation: “Take my advice, 
and speer [ask] as little about him as he does 
about you. Best to let sleeping dogs lie” (Sir 
Walter Scott, Redgauntlet, 1824). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded c. 1385 in Chaucer’s 
Troilus and Criseyde, in the form “It is nought 
good a slepyng hound to wake.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t rock the boat; never trou-
ble trouble till trouble troubles you.
let the buyer beware  It is the buyer’s 
responsibility to check the quality or 
nature of goods or services before pur-
chasing them; a legal principle in some 
types of transaction, and also used as a 
general warning to anybody making or 
considering a purchase: The streets of the 
old town are lined with colorful market stalls, 
but tourists who are tempted by the goods on 
display would do well to remember the saying 
“Let the buyer beware.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1523 in J. Fitzherbert’s 
Husbandry. It is often used in the Latin 
form “Caveat emptor.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the buyer needs a thousand eyes, the 
seller wants but one.
let the chips fall where they may  Pay 
no attention to the possible consequences 
 let the chips fall where they may
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   165 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
166
of your actions, and carry on regard-
less: “This is one area where Mr. Jacoby 
admits to a certain reckless disregard for 
practical consequences, saying that he 
has, perhaps foolishly, ‘let the chips fall 
where they may’” (New York Times, 1987). 
The proverb comes from a speech made 
by U.S. senator Roscoe Conkling in 1880: 
“He [Ulysses S. Grant] will hew to the line 
of right, let the chips fl y where they may.” 
Chips are small, thin pieces of wood: the 
woodcutter carries on with his task, dis-
regarding any chips that are thrown up in 
his process of hewing.
let the cobbler stick to his last  People 
should not offer advice, make criticisms, 
or otherwise interfere in matters outside 
their own area of knowledge or expertise: 
I’m sick and tired of accountants from the city 
telling me how to farm my own land—let the 
cobbler stick to his last. Of ancient origin, 
the proverb comes from a story about 
the Greek painter Apelles (fourth century 
b.c.), who permitted a certain cobbler 
to point out a mistake in the way he had 
painted a shoe but would not tolerate his 
criticism of other parts of the painting. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in 1539, in the form “Let not the shoe-
maker go beyond his shoe.”
Variants of this proverb: The cobbler 
should stick to his last; the cobbler to his 
last and the gunner to his linstock.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every man to his trade.
let the dead bury the dead  Do not con-
cern yourself with things that are past and 
gone: “Let, then, the dead bury the dead. 
The task for us is to rejuvenate ourselves 
and our subject” (J. S. Huxley, What Dare 
I Think?, 1931). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “And another of his disciples said 
unto him, Lord, suffer me fi rst to go and 
bury my father. But Jesus said unto him, 
Follow me; and let the dead bury their 
dead” (Matthew 8:21–22).
let them laugh that win  Do not rejoice 
until you are certain of victory or success: 
Let them laugh that win—the battle is still far 
from over. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1546 in John Heywood’s Dialogue of 
Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: the winners 
laugh, the losers weep.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he who laughs last, laughs longest.
let well alone  See leave well enough 
alone.
let your head save your heels  You can 
avoid wasted journeys on foot by careful 
planning or forethought, such as by com-
bining errands: If you had put the drinks on a 
tray, you could have saved yourself at least two 
trips to the kitchen. Will you never learn to let 
your head save your heels? The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1828 in W. Carr’s Dialect 
of Craven.
Variant of this proverb: use your 
head and save your feet.
a liar is not believed when he tells the 
truth  There is no way of knowing when 
somebody with a reputation for lying is 
telling the truth: She was an attention-
seeker, known for wasting police time with 
tall stories about muggings and burglaries. 
So she had only herself to blame when her 
genuine complaint about the stalker was not 
taken seriously—a liar is not believed when 
he tells the truth. The proverb occurs in 
the writings of Aristotle and Cicero. 
let the cobbler stick to his last
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   166 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
167
The sentiment it expresses can be found 
in one of the fables of Aesop (sixth cen-
tury b.c.), about a shepherd boy who 
repeatedly cries “Wolf!” when his sheep 
are not in danger, and whose cries are 
therefore ignored when the wolf fi nally 
appears.
Variant of this proverb: nobody 
believes a liar when he speaks the truth.
a liar is worse than a thief  People who 
lie are even less trustworthy than people 
who thieve: “But sure the proverbe is as 
true as briefe,/A lyer’s ever worse then 
a thiefe” (John Taylor, All the Workes of John 
Taylor, the Water Poet, 1630). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1623 in W. Painter’s 
Chaucer New Painted.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
show me a liar and i will show you 
a thief.
a liar should have a good memory  Li-
ars must remember the untruths they 
have told, to avoid contradicting them-
selves at some later date: “They say a 
liar has to have a good memory. In that 
case, Mr. Reagan’s testimony is proof 
of his honesty” (Washington Times, 1990). 
The proverb occurs in the writings of 
Quintilian (c. a.d. 35–c. 100). It was 
fi rst recorded in English, in its current 
form, c. 1690.
liberty is not licence [license]  Freedom 
does not mean that a person can what-
ever he or she wants: As far as his wife is 
concerned, he is allowed to go out and enjoy 
himself, but he knows very well that liberty 
is not licence. The proverb is a quotation 
from Sonnet vii, written by John Milton 
in 1645: “Licence they mean when they 
cry liberty.”
a lie can go around the world and back 
again while the truth is lacing up its 
boots  False rumors travel with alarm-
ing speed: A lie can go around the world 
and back again while the truth is lacing up 
its boots, and if the media get hold of the 
idea that you are guilty, you will have a hard 
job subsequently proving your innocence. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1859, but 
with the implication that it had long been 
in general use. The sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient origin.
Variant of this proverb: a lie is half-
way around the world before the truth has 
got its boots on.
life begins at forty  Your middle years 
can be the best time of your life, and 
many people make a fresh start or take a 
renewed interest in life at this time: “All 
our age benchmarks, which used to seem 
solid as rocks, have turned into shifting 
sands. “Life Begins at 40? More like 60” 
(New York Times, 1991). The proverb dates 
from 1932, when it was used as the title 
of a book by the U.S. writer Walter B. 
Pitkin. In the text of the book Pitkin pre-
dicted its future proverbial status: “Life 
begins at forty. . . . Today it is half a truth. 
Tomorrow it will be an axiom.”
life is hard by the yard, but by the inch 
life’s a cinch  Life is less overwhelming 
if you take it one step at a time: A diffi cult 
time lay ahead, but I drew strength from the 
saying: “Life is hard by the yard, but by the inch 
life’s a cinch.” The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression the United States.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one step at a time.
life is just a bowl of cherries  Life is 
pleasant and carefree; said when things 
 life is just a bowl of cherries
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   167 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
168
are going well, or ironically when things 
are going badly: She looked back nostalgi-
cally on the days when she was young and 
single, and life was just a bowl of cherries. The 
proverb dates from 1931, when it was 
used as the title of a song by Lew Brown 
and Ray Henderson. In 1978 the Ameri-
can humorist Erma Bombeck wrote a 
book entitled If Life Is Just a Bowl of Cher-
ries,  What Am I Doing in the Pits?
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: life is no bed of roses; life isn’t 
all beer and skittles.
life is no bed of roses  Do not expect 
life to be easy and pleasant; often used 
of life in a particular situation or with a 
particular person: Everybody knows that life 
is no bed of roses in the armed forces, but new 
recruits are often horrifi ed to learn just how 
hard they are expected to work. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1780.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
life isn’t all beer and skittles.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: life is just a bowl of cherries.
life isn’t all beer and skittles  You can-
not always be enjoying yourself: “Life 
isn’t all beer and skittles, but beer and 
skittles, or something better of the 
same sort, must form a good part of 
every Englishman’s education” (Thomas 
Hughes, Tom Brown’s Schooldays, 1857). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in the 
19th century, when drinking beer and 
playing skittles (a bowling game) were 
popular leisure activities among British 
working men.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
life is no bed of roses.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: life is just a bowl of cherries.
life is short and sweet  Life seems all 
the more pleasurable for being brief in 
duration: Life is short and sweet, but not 
for some of the aged residents of hospitals in 
countries where euthanasia remains illegal. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1802 
in Port Folio.
Variant of this proverb: life is sweet.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: life’s a bitch, and then you die.
life is short and time is swift  Time 
passes too quickly for us to waste any 
moment of our short lives: He tried to cram 
as much as possible into his waking hours, on 
the basis of the proverb “Life is short and time 
is swift.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
seize the day.
life is sweet  See life is short and 
sweet.
life is too short  We must make the most 
of our short lives, and not waste time on 
trivial things: I have no patience with people 
who fall out with their friends or relatives over 
some petty issue and don’t speak to them for 
months or years on end—life is too short!
Variant of this proverb: life is too 
short to be little.
life is what you make it  You have only 
yourself to blame if your life does not turn 
out as you would have liked it to: I believe 
that life is what you make it, and there is no point 
in sitting around complaining about your lack of 
good fortune. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1897 in the writings of the American phi-
losopher and psychologist William James.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every man is the architect of his own 
fortune.
life is no bed of roses
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   168 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
169
life’s a bitch, and then you die  Life is 
full of unpleasantness and injustice: “It’s not 
fair, Dad—I have to do all the hard jobs around 
the house, and Kate gets all the easy ones.” “I 
know, son—life’s a bitch, and then you die.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: life is short and sweet.
light come, light go  See easy come, 
easy go.
light gains make heavy purses  It is 
possible to become rich by making small 
profi ts: They took a tiny percentage of each 
item sold, but light gains make heavy purses if 
there are enough of them. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in J. Heywood’s 
A Dialogue containing . . . the Proverbs in the 
English Tongue.
Variant of this proverb: light win-
nings make heavy purses.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
take care of the pennies and the dol-
lars will take care of themselves.
lightning never strikes twice in the same 
place  The same unpleasant or unexpected 
phenomenon will not recur in the same 
place or circumstances, or happen to the 
same person again; a superstition that often 
leads to a false sense of security: “They did 
not hit me at all. . . . Lightning never strikes 
twice in the same place, nor cannon balls 
either, I presume” (P. H. Myers, The Prisoner 
of the Border, 1857). The quotation is the 
fi rst recorded use of the proverb.
Variant of this proverb: lightning 
never strikes the same place twice.
a light purse makes a heavy heart  Those 
who have little money are anxious and 
troubled: The careworn faces of the unem-
ployed are a graphic illustration of the saying 
“A light purse makes a heavy heart.”  The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1555 by 
J. Heywood.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a heavy purse makes a light heart.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: money can’t buy happiness.
light winnings make heavy purses  See 
light gains make heavy purses.
like attracts like  Similar people tend to 
be drawn to one another: Like attracts like, 
so it seemed inevitable that they would become 
friends. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English c. 1375, but with the implication 
that it was already in general use. The senti-
ment it expresses is of ancient origin, and is 
found in Homer’s Odyssey (c. eighth century 
b.c.): “the god always brings like to like.”
Variant of this proverb: like will to 
like.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
birds of a feather flock together.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: opposites attract.
like breeds like  People are infl uenced 
by others and tend to behave in the same 
way; also used to imply that one thing 
will lead to something similar: “Like men, 
like manners:/Like breeds like, they say” 
(Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Poems, 1842). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1557 
(Roger Edgeworth, Sermons) in the form 
“Like makes like.” It is sometimes inter-
preted with literal reference to parents 
and their offspring.
Variant of this proverb: like begets 
like.
like cures like  The best remedy for a 
disease or affl iction is something that is 
 like cures like
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   169 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
170
capable of causing the same condition; 
the motto of homeopathic medicine: “On 
the homeopathic principle of ‘like cures 
like,’ a cigar was the best preventative 
against . . . smoke” (Cuthbert Bede, Ver-
dant Green, 1853). The proverb is associ-
ated with the German physician Samuel 
Hahnemann (1755–1843), the founder 
of homeopathy. It also exists in the Latin 
form “Similia similibus curantur.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: fight fire with fire; take a hair 
of the dog that bit you.
like father, like son  Sons tend to resem-
ble their fathers in character and behavior; 
often used to draw attention to such a 
similarity: We weren’t surprised to learn 
that he had developed an alcohol problem—
like father, like son. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1340 in the form “Ill sons 
follow ill fathers.”
Variant of this proverb: as is the 
father, so is the son.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the apple never falls far from 
the tree; like mother, like daugh-
ter.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: beauty is no inheritance.
like master, like man  Servants and other 
workers tend to follow the good or bad 
example set by their employers: I don’t 
trust him—the person he works for is a rogue 
and a swindler, and like master, like man. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1530 in the form “Such master such man.” 
The sentiment it expresses is of ancient 
origin, and is found in Petronius’s Satyri-
con (fi rst century a.d.): “qualis dominus, 
talis et servus [as is the master, so is the 
servant].”
Variant of this proverb: an ill master 
makes an ill servant.
like mother, like daughter  Daughters 
tend to resemble their mothers in char-
acter and behavior; often used to draw 
attention to such a similarity: “It’s a case 
of like mother, like daughter—they’re 
not the kind of women who forgive and 
forget, I’ll tell you that” (Michael Korda, 
Queenie, 1985). The proverb is of bibli-
cal origin: “Behold, every one that useth 
proverbs shall use this proverb against 
thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her 
daughter” (Ezekiel 16:44).
Variant of this proverb: as is the 
mother, so is the daughter.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the apple never falls far from the 
tree; like father, like son.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: beauty is no inheritance.
like people, like priest  The quality of 
a spiritual leader can be judged by the 
behavior of his or her followers: “He had 
so deep a reverence for the clergy, that it 
never entered into his mind that perhaps, 
after all, it was ‘like people, like priest’” 
(Richard Heath, The English Peasant, 1893). 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “And 
there shall be, like people, like priest: 
and I will punish them for their ways, and 
reward them their doings” (Hosea 4:9).
Variant of this proverb: like priest, 
like people.
like will to like  See like attracts like.
the lion is not so fi erce as he is painted 
Some people have reputations that far 
exceed their real characters: Many of 
the staff were nervous about meeting the new 
like father, like son
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   170 1/29/07   5:12:45 PM
171
headteacher, but it turned out that the lion 
was not so fi erce as he had been painted. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1599 in R. 
Percyvall’s A Spanish Grammar, now aug-
mented . . . by J. Minsheu.
listeners never hear any good of them-
selves  People who eavesdrop on the 
conversations of others risk hearing unfa-
vorable comments about themselves; used 
as a warning or reprimand: Come away from 
that door—you know what they are talking 
about in there, and listeners never hear any 
good of themselves. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1647 in the form “Hearkeners 
never hear good of themselves.”
Variant of this proverb: eavesdrop-
pers hear no good of themselves.
a little absence does much good  A 
short period of absence can have a sur-
prisingly benefi cial effect: It might be 
better, both for you and for your workforce, 
if you didn’t visit the factory every single 
day. Remember the saying “A little absence 
does much good.” The proverb is recorded 
as a regional expression in the United 
States.
LITERARY PROVERBS
A signifi cant number of proverbs in regular use today have their origins in the writings of a 
particular author. The following selection identifi es just a few familiar proverbs as the contri-
butions of specifi c writers.
The best is yet to be (Browning)
The best-laid schemes of mice and men gang oft aglay (Burns)
Blessed is he who expects nothing, for he shall never be disappointed (Pope)
Brevity is the soul of wit (Shakespeare)
Cowards die many times before their deaths (Shakespeare)
To err is human; to forgive, divine (Pope)
Fools rush in where angels fear to tread (Pope)
Frailty, thy name is woman! (Shakespeare)
Gather ye rosebuds while ye may (Herrick)
God’s in his heaven —all’s right with the world (Browning)
Hope springs eternal (Pope)
A little learning is a dangerous thing (Pope)
Neither a borrower nor a lender be (Shakespeare)
Ours not to reason why (Tennyson)
A rose by any other name would smell as sweet (Shakespeare)
Self-praise is no recommendation (Dickens)
Sweet are the uses of adversity (Shakespeare)
There is a divinity that shapes our ends (Shakespeare)
A thing of beauty is a joy for ever (Keats)
Where ignorance is bliss, ’tis folly to be wise (Gray)
ååååå
 a little absence does much good
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   171 1/29/07   5:12:46 PM
172
little and often fi lls the purse  A small 
but regular income will provide you with all 
the money you need; also applied to small 
amounts saved regularly: Little and often fi lls 
the purse, and by putting away just ten dollars a 
week I managed to accumulate a substantial nest 
egg. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1582 
in S. Gosson’s Plays Confuted.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
many a little makes a mickle.
little birds that can sing and won’t sing 
must be made to sing  Those who refuse 
to tell what they know must be forced 
to do so; also interpreted more literally: 
“When the disdainful oligarchs declined to 
join in the songs . . . the great Republican 
leader, with his rough humour, said the 
words which are written in gold upon his 
monument, ‘Little birds that can sing and 
won’t sing, must be made to sing’” (G. K. 
Chesterton, Napoleon of Notting Hill, 1904). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1678 in 
John Ray’s A Collection of English Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: the bird that 
can sing and won’t sing should be made 
to sing.
little boats should stay close to 
shore  Do not take large risks if you 
have limited resources: We are only a small 
company, and little boats should stay close to 
shore—we dare not risk investing in such an 
uncertain enterprise. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1751, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Variant of this proverb: great boats 
may venture more, but little boats should 
keep near shore.
little drops of water, little grains of 
sand, make a mighty ocean and a pleas-
ant land  Nothing is too small to be 
of value: All contributions, however small, 
will be gratefully received and put to good 
use—little drops of water, little grains of sand, 
make a mighty ocean and a pleasant land. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1845 
in Julia A. Carney’s Little Things.
Variant of this proverb: many drops 
of water make an ocean.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every little helps.
little fi sh are sweet  The smallest things 
are sometimes the most desirable or 
acceptable; used specifi cally of some-
thing received, bought, or otherwise 
acquired: “‘They’ll sell at a loss,’ he 
went on, with a sigh, ‘but sure, little 
fi sh is sweet! and the rent has to be 
made up’” (K. F. Purdon, The Folk of 
Furry Farm, 1914). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1830 in R. Forby’s Vocabu-
lary of East Anglia.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
small is beautiful.
a little knowledge is a dangerous 
thing  It is often better to have no 
knowledge of something than to have 
incomplete or inadequate knowledge, 
which can lead to false confi dence, wrong 
judgments, and disastrous mistakes: Peo-
ple who try to treat major injuries after a 
few lessons in fi rst aid can do more harm 
than good—a little knowledge is a danger-
ous thing. Of ancient origin, the proverb 
takes its current form from Alexander 
Pope’s Essay on Criticism (1711): “A little 
learning is a dang’rous thing;/ Drink 
deep, or taste not the Pierian spring” and 
is sometimes regarded as a misquotation. 
In his essay “Science and Culture,” writ-
ten in 1877, Thomas Huxley asked: “If a 
little knowledge is dangerous, where is 
little and often fi lls the purse
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   172 1/29/07   5:12:46 PM
173
the man who has so much as to be out 
of danger?”
Variant of this proverb: a little learn-
ing is a dangerous thing.
little leaks sink the ship  Small and 
apparently insignifi cant expenses can 
mount up to major sums and cause seri-
ous fi nancial problems: “Surely you can 
afford to give me a few dollars.” “Maybe I 
can, but little leaks sink the ship, and if I gave 
handouts to everybody who asked for them, 
I’d soon be ruined.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1616 in the form “It is a little 
leak that drowns a ship.”
Variant of this proverb: small leaks 
sink big ships.
a little learning is a dangerous thing  See 
a little knowledge is a dangerous 
thing.
a little of what you fancy does you 
good  It is benefi cial to indulge yourself 
from time to time: She popped another choc-
olate in her mouth, telling herself that a little 
of what you fancy does you good. The prov-
erb comes from a music hall song of the 
same title that became well known in the 
1890s, especially as sung by Marie Lloyd. 
The original implication was sexual, but it 
may now refer to any number of more or 
less illicit pleasures.
little pitchers have big ears  Children 
miss little of what is said in their hearing; 
often used as a warning: I thought the kids 
were engrossed in their computer game, but 
little pitchers have big ears, and the story was 
all over the school by the end of the next day. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in 
the form “Small pitchers have wide ears.” 
It occurs in Shakespeare’s play Richard III 
(2:4): “Good madam, be not angry with 
the child. Pitchers have ears.”
a little pot is soon hot  Small people 
are reputed to be more easily angered 
than others: A little pot is soon hot, and the 
staff soon learned to stay on the right side of 
the diminutive Mr. Green. First recorded in 
1546, the proverb occurs in Shakespeare’s 
play The Taming of the Shrew (4:1): “Now 
were not I a little pot and soon hot, my 
very lips might freeze to my teeth.”
little strokes fell great oaks  Great 
things can be achieved in small stages, or 
with persistent effort: “Stick to it steadily 
and you will see great Effects; for . . . 
little Strokes fell great Oaks” (Benjamin 
Franklin, Poor Richard Improved, 1757). 
The proverb is probably of ancient origin; 
in his Adagia (1500) the Dutch human-
ist Desiderius Erasmus quotes the Latin 
proverb “Multis ictibus deiicitur quercus 
[The oak is felled by many blows].” It also 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play Henry VI, Part 
3 (2:1): “And many strokes, though with 
a little axe,/Hews down and fells the 
hardest-timber’d oak.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: constant dropping wears away a 
stone.
little thieves are hanged, but great ones 
escape  It is often the case that petty 
criminals are brought to justice, while 
those involved in more serious crimes 
succeed in evading capture and punish-
ment: The man who masterminded the rob-
bery is living a life of luxury in exile, while 
his accomplices rot in jail. As always, the 
little thieves are hanged but the great ones 
escape. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1639, but the French had 
 little thieves are hanged, but great ones escape
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   173 1/29/07   5:12:46 PM
174
a similar saying in the late 14th century: 
“Les petits larrons sont penduez, non pas les 
grands [Little thieves are hanged, not 
big ones].”
little things please little minds  Foolish 
people are easily pleased; said contemptu-
ously to or of somebody who is amused 
by something childish or trivial: She was 
engrossed in folding the discarded candy wrap-
pers into different shapes—little things please 
little minds! The proverb has been traced 
back to the works of the Roman poet 
Ovid (43 b.c.–a.d. 18): “parva leves capiunt 
animos [small things enthral light minds].” 
It was fi rst recorded in English in 1576 in 
the form “A little thing pleases a fool.” A 
person to whom the proverb is contemp-
tuously addressed may retort, “While 
smaller minds look on” or “While bigger 
fools look on.”
Variant of this proverb: small things 
affect light minds.
live and learn  People learn by experi-
ence; often said by or to somebody who 
has made an error of judgment: I thought 
they could be trusted, but it seems I was 
wrong—live and learn. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1575 (in George Gas-
coigne, The Glasse of Governement) as “We 
live to learne.”
Variant of this proverb: live and 
learn; die and forget.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: experience is the mother of wis-
dom; the older the wiser.
live and let live  We must be tolerant of 
other people, and not condemn or try to 
change their way of life just because it is 
different from our own: “If ‘pragmatism’ 
and ‘pluralism’ meant a new openness 
and tolerance, a willingness, in common 
parlance, ‘to live and let live,’ an erosion 
of dogmatism, and a decline in religious 
and racial prejudices, they also meant an 
often bewildering absence of certitude, 
a sense of confusion and even abandon-
ment” (Page Smith, The Rise of Industrial 
America, 1984). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1622, and is said to be of 
Dutch origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it takes all kinds of people to make 
a world.
live by the sword, die by the sword  See 
he who lives by the sword dies by the 
sword.
a live dog is better than a dead lion  It 
is better to be alive than dead; used to 
justify an apparent act of cowardice in a 
life-threatening situation: “When the lion 
is shot, the dog gets the spoil. So he had 
come in for Katherine, Alan’s lioness. A 
live dog is better than a dead lion” (D. 
H. Lawrence, The Woman Who Rode Away, 
1928). The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“To him that is joined to all the living 
there is hope: for a living dog is better 
than a dead lion” (Ecclesiastes 9:4).
Variant of this proverb: a living dog 
is better than a dead lion.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he who fights and runs away may live 
to fight another day.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: it’s better to die on your feet 
than live on your knees.
live every day as though it were your 
last  Live life to the full, and make 
the most of every waking moment: “He 
enjoyed variety. He loved adventure. ‘Live 
little things please little minds
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   174 1/29/07   5:12:46 PM
175
each day as if it’s your last’—that became 
his philosophy” (C. David Heymann, A 
Woman Named Jackie, 1989).
Variant of this proverb: live each day 
as though it were the last.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomor-
row we die.
a living dog is better than a dead 
lion  See a live dog is better than a 
dead lion.
location, location, location  It is the 
physical location that gives something its 
real value: In the end they decided not to move 
the company into the center of town, forgetting 
the golden rule “location, location, location.” An 
introduction of the late 20th century, it has 
become partiularly associated with the sell-
ing of property.
the longest day must have an end  No 
bad experience lasts forever: He hid in the 
shelter while the bombardment continued, tell-
ing himself over and over again that the longest 
day must have an end. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1580 in John Lyly’s Euphues 
and His England.
Variant of this proverb: the longest 
night will have an end.
Proverbs expressing a similar 
meaning: be the day weary or be the 
day long, at last it ringeth to even-
song; it’s a long road that has no 
turning.
the longest journey begins with a single 
step  See a journey of a thousand 
miles begins with one step.
the longest night will have an end  See 
the longest day must have an end.
the longest way around is the shortest 
way home  It is best to do things care-
fully and thoroughly rather than trying 
to cut corners: There is a quicker method of 
doing the calculation, but people often make 
mistakes when they use it—in this case the 
longest way around is the shortest way home. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1635 
in the form “The next way home’s the 
farthest way about.” The sentiment it 
expresses, however, is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: the farthest 
way about is the nearest way home.
long foretold, long last; short notice, 
soon past  A change in the weather that 
is predicted well in advance lasts longer 
than one that arrives with little warning: 
If the saying “Long foretold, long last; short 
notice, soon past,” an old piece of weather lore, 
can be applied to the economy, then this unex-
pected downturn should be of relatively brief 
duration. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1866 (A. Steinmetz, Manual of Weather-
casts), but with the implication that it had 
long been in use among amateur weather 
forecasters.
look after the pennies and the dollars 
will look after themselves  See take 
care of the pennies and the dollars 
will take care of themselves.
look before you leap  Think before you 
act, especially before you do something 
that could have serious or disastrous con-
sequences: “When you feel tempted to 
marry . . . look twice before you leap” 
(Charlotte Brontë, Shirley, 1849). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1350 in the 
form “First look and afterward leap,” but 
the sentiment it expresses can be found in 
the fables of Aesop (sixth century b.c.).
 look before you leap
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   175 1/29/07   5:12:46 PM
176
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
action without thought is like shoot-
ing without aim.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: he who hesitates is lost.
lookers-on see most of the game  An 
objective observer with an overall view of 
a situation is often more knowledgeable, 
or better placed to make a judgment, than 
somebody who is actively involved, and 
whose attention is therefore focused on 
individual details: Lookers-on see most of the 
game, and the solution was obvious to all except 
those who were trying to fi nd it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in Francis Bacon’s essay 
“Of Followers” (1597): “To take aduise of 
friends is euer honorable: For lookers on 
many times see more then gamesters.” 
The sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: lookers-on 
see more than players.
look on the bright side, or polish up the 
dark one  See always look on the 
bright side. 
look out for number one  See take care 
of number one.
loose lips sink ships  Careless talk can 
cause trouble, if it results in the wrong 
people gaining access to sensitive infor-
mation: “Mr. Hopkins, who said he was 
‘appalled’ when Mr. Aspin left the hearing 
Tuesday and talked at length with report-
ers waiting outside, was particularly harsh 
in his criticism today. ‘It makes us bring 
back the old saying, perhaps—loose lips 
sink ships,’ Mr. Hopkins said” (New York 
Times, 1987). The proverb originated as a 
security slogan of World War II.
Variant of this proverb: a slip of the 
lip will sink a ship.
the Lord gives and the Lord takes away 
God has the right to take away something 
that he has previously given to us: often 
said in consolation to, or resignedly by, 
somebody who has suffered a devastating 
loss: We would all like to hold onto the beauty 
and stamina of our youth, but we must remem-
ber that the Lord gives and the Lord takes away. 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Naked 
came I out of my mother’s womb, and 
naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, 
and the Lord hath taken away” (Job 1:21).
Variant of this proverb: the Lord 
who gave can take away.
the Lord moves in mysterious ways  See 
god moves in mysterious ways.
lordships change manners  See honors 
change manners.
the Lord who gave can take away  See 
the lord gives and the lord takes away.
lose an hour in the morning, chase it all 
day  Time lost in the morning is impos-
sible to make up later in the day: His secre-
tary was always punctual, knowing that is she 
lost an hour in the morning she would chase it 
all day. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1859 in Samuel Smiles’s Self-Help.
Variant of this proverb: lost time is 
never found again.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
an hour in the morning is worth 
two in the evening; time lost cannot 
be recalled.
love and a cough cannot be hid  It is 
impossible to conceal the fact that you 
lookers-on see most of the game
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   176 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
177
are in love with somebody: It is said that 
love and a cough cannot be hid, but they 
managed to keep their relationship secret for 
several months. Of Latin origin, the proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English in 1573 in 
J. Sandforde’s Garden of Pleasure (1573): 
“Foure things cannot be kept close, Loue, 
the cough, fyre, and sorrowe.”
Variant of this proverb: love and 
smoke cannot be hidden.
love begets love  The best way to win 
somebody’s affection is to treat him or 
her in a loving manner: “Love begets 
love, and . . . if a man loves God, then 
that glowing beam will glow whether it 
is turned to earth or turned to heaven” 
(Alexander MacLaren, The Epistle to the 
Ephesians, 1909). Of Latin origin, the 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
Robert Herrick’s Hesperides (1648): “Love 
love begets, then never be/Unsoft to him 
who’s smooth to thee.”
love conquers all  Love can overcome 
any obstacle or opposition: Their relation-
ship survived and fl ourished, despite parental 
disapproval and long periods of separation, 
proving that love does indeed conquer all. 
The proverb comes from the writings of 
Virgil (70–19 b.c.): “Omnia vincit Amor 
[Love conquers all things].” The alterna-
tive Latin form “Amor vincit omnia” occurs 
in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
love will find a way.
love is blind  People do not notice the 
faults of those they love: “Love is blind. 
It’s also deaf and sometimes stupid” (Wash-
ington Times, 1998). Of ancient origin, the 
proverb occurs in the writings of the Greek 
poet Theocritus (c. 308–c. 240 b.c.). It 
was fi rst recorded in English in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390).
love is blind; friendship closes its eyes 
Lovers do not notice each other’s faults, 
whereas friends notice but disregard them: 
Love is blind; friendship closes its eyes—I know 
Jack’s a rogue, but I still value him as a friend, 
whereas Molly is too infatuated with him to 
believe that he’s anything but a saint.
love is free  People tend to fall in love 
regardless of the suitability of the match 
or other obstacles. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1386 in Geoffrey Chaucer’s 
The Knight’s Tale: “Thynk wel that love is 
fre! And I wol love hire mawgree al thy 
myght.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
love will find a way.
love laughs at locksmiths  Nothing and 
nobody can keep lovers apart: There’s no 
point in trying to stop her seeing her boy-
friend by making her a prisoner in her own 
home—love laughs at locksmiths. The prov-
erb dates from 1803, when it was used as 
the title of a play by George Colman. The 
sentiment it expresses, however, occurs 
in Shakespeare’s poem “Venus and Adonis” 
(1592–93): “Were beauty under twenty 
locks kept fast,/Yet love breaks through 
and picks them all at last.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
love will find a way.
love makes the world go round  Love 
gives motivation and meaning to all 
human activity: “‘Oh, ’tis love, ’tis love 
that makes the world go round!’ ‘Some-
body said,’ Alice whispered, ‘that it’s done 
by everybody minding their own busi-
ness’” (Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in 
 love makes the world go round
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   177 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
178
Wonderland, 1865). The proverb occurs in 
a French popular song of unknown date 
and authorship, and a similar observation 
regarding heaven was made by the Italian 
poets Jacopone da Todi (c. 1230–1306) 
and Dante Alighieri (1265–1321). In his 
novel Whisky Galore (1947), Compton 
Mackenzie wrote, “Love makes the world 
go round? Not at all. Whisky makes it go 
round twice as fast.”
love me, love my dog  If you love some-
body, you must be prepared to accept 
or tolerate everything and everybody 
connected with that person—his or her 
failings, idiosyncrasies, friends, rela-
tives, and so on: “‘I hope, Glencora, you 
do not count me as your enemy?’ said 
Mrs. Marsham, drawing herself up. ‘But 
I shall—certainly, if you attack Alice. 
Love me, love my dog. I beg your pardon, 
Alice; but what I meant was this, Mrs. 
Marsham; Love me, love the best friend I 
have in the world’” (Anthony Trollope, Can 
You Forgive Her?, 1864). The proverb dates 
from the 12th century or earlier, and was 
used in a sermon by Saint Bernard: “qui 
me amat, amat et canem meum [who loves 
me, also loves my dog].”
love me little, love me long  Warm affec-
tion lasts longer than burning passion: 
Their relationship was far too intense to 
last—there is truth in the old saying “Love me 
little, love me long.” The proverb dates from 
before 1500. The sentiment it expresses 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play Romeo and 
Juliet (2:6), “Therefore love moderately; 
long love doth so.”
the love of money is the root of all 
evil  Greed and avarice are the cause of 
many of the ills of this world: There are 
those who condemn capitalism on the basis of 
the proverb “The love of money is the root of all 
evil.” The proverb is of biblical origin: “For 
the love of money is the root of all evil: 
which while some coveted after, they have 
erred from the faith” (1 Timothy 6:10).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money is the root of all evil.
love will fi nd a way  There are no effec-
tive obstacles to or defenses against love: 
The behavior of diffi cult children can improve 
dramatically after a few months in a car-
ing foster family—love will fi nd a way. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in Thomas 
Deloney’s The Gentle Craft (c. 1598).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: love conquers all; love is free; 
love laughs at locksmiths.
love your enemy, but don’t put a gun 
in his hand  Treat your enemies with 
respect and humanity, but also with cau-
tion— do not give them the opportunity 
to repay your kindness with an act of 
aggression: Several people spoke against the 
proposal, warning that it could prove to be a 
step too far in the détente between East and 
West. One of them reminded the assembly of the 
proverb “Love your enemy, but don’t put a gun 
in his hand.”
love your neighbor as yourself  Every-
body should treat everybody else with 
respect, kindness, and tolerance: The 
world would be a better place if only people 
could be persuaded to follow this simple rule: 
“Love your neighbor as yourself.” The prov-
erb is of biblical origin: “Thou shalt not 
avenge, nor bear any grudge against the 
children of thy people, but thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself ” (Leviticus 19:18). 
Extensions of the proverb include “Love 
love me, love my dog
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   178 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
179
your neighbor, but don’t pull down the 
fence” and “Love your neighbor, but leave 
his wife alone.”
lucky at cards, unlucky in love  Those 
who have luck at card games are less for-
tunate in matters of the heart; said when 
somebody wins or loses at cards: After losing 
six games in succession, she consoled herself with 
the saying “Lucky at cards, unlucky in love.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1866, but 
with the implication that it had long been 
in general use. The sentiment it expresses 
occurs in Jonathan Swift’s Polite Conversation 
(1738): “Well, Miss, you’ll have a sad Hus-
band, you have such good Luck at Cards.”
 lucky at cards, unlucky in love
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   179 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
ååå   å
180
make a virtue of necessity  The best 
way to handle an undesirable situation is 
to turn it to your advantage: “Welcomed 
as a friend of the house, I had nothing for 
it but to take my seat quietly, and making 
a virtue of necessity, endeavour to derive 
my share of the benefi t arising from 
an excellent sermon” (Sir Walter Scott, 
Chronicles of the Canongate, 1827). Of 
ancient origin, the proverb occurs in the 
writings of Chaucer and Shakespeare.
make haste slowly  Do not rush—you 
will achieve your end more quickly if you 
proceed with care: In conducting an investi-
gation of this nature, the police were well aware 
of the need to make haste slowly—it was far 
too easy to overlook a vital clue. In its Latin 
form “Festina lente,” the proverb is attrib-
uted to the Roman emperor Augustus (63 
b.c.–a.d. 14). It was fi rst recorded in its 
current form in Benjamin Franklin’s Poor 
Richard’s Almanack (1744).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
slow and steady wins the race.
make hay while the sun shines  Take 
advantage of an opportunity or a favorable 
situation when it presents itself, because 
it may be short-lived: “Meanwhile . . . 
I was busy with my own affairs, making 
hay while the sun shone. So great were 
the crowds of people who came up to 
Nodwengu that in a week I had sold 
everything I had to sell in the two wagons, 
that were mostly laden with cloth, beads, 
knives and so forth” (H. Rider Haggard, 
Child of Storm, 1913). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in John Heywood’s Dialogue 
of Proverbs (1546).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: hoist your sail when the wind is 
fair; strike while the iron is hot.
a man can only die once  Death can 
only happen once in a lifetime: The con-
demned man was sanguine about the coming 
ordeal, telling himself “a man can only die 
once.” The proverb was first recorded 
c. 1597 by William Shakespeare in 2 
Henry IV (3:2), in the form “A man can 
die but once.”
man does not live by bread alone  Peo-
ple need more than the basic necessities, 
such as food and shelter, to lead a full 
and satisfying life: “Man, we know, can-
not live by bread alone but hang me if I 
don’t believe that some women could live 
by love alone” (Joseph Conrad, Chance, 
1913). The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“man doth not live by bread only, but by 
every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 8:3), 
m
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   180 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
181
“It is written, Man shall not live by bread 
alone, but by every word that proceedeth 
out of the mouth of God” (Matthew 4:4).
Variant of this proverb: man cannot 
live by bread alone.
a man in debt is caught in a net  Those 
who owe money are trapped by their obli-
gations and at the mercy of their creditors: 
My father once told me, “A man in debt is caught 
in a net,” and on the basis of that advice I have 
never borrowed a cent from anybody.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
out of debt, out of danger.
a man is a lion in his own cause  People 
tend to exceed expectations when they 
have a personal interest in something: No 
one thought he would put up much of a struggle 
in court, but men can prove lions in their own 
cause. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
David Fergusson, Scottish Proverbs, 1641.
a man is as old as he feels, and a woman 
as old as she looks  Chronological age 
is irrelevant—a man of 40 may feel 30 
on a good day and 50 on a bad day, and a 
woman can use clothing and cosmetics to 
make herself look younger or older than 
she is: “She is always making me out so 
much older than I am and that’s not fair, 
for a man is only as old as he feels and a 
woman is only as old as she looks” (V. Lush, 
Thames Journal, 1871). The quotation is 
the fi rst recorded use of the proverb. Its 
two halves are often used separately, the 
fi rst to encourage a youthful attitude to 
life, and the second to encourage women 
to take care of their appearance. Facetious 
variants include “A man is as old as the 
woman he feels” and “A man is as old as 
he feels, a woman as old as she feels like 
admitting.”
a man is innocent until proven guilty  A 
person accused of a crime or wrongdoing 
is assumed to be innocent until his or her 
guilt has been proved; a legal principle 
in many countries: “‘Do you feel your 
“no comment” will be translated as say-
ing you’re guilty?’ ‘To my knowledge,’ he 
said, ‘you’re innocent until proven guilty’” 
(New York Times, 1989). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1910, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of earlier origin, e.g., 
Junius, Letters: “Where the guilt is doubt-
ful, a presumption of innocence should in 
general be admitted.”
a man is known by the company he 
keeps  People may base their judgment 
of you on the reputation or character of 
those you associate with, so take care in 
choosing your friends: “Now when you 
came here, I told you to make friends 
slowly, I told you to make sure they were 
the right kinds of friends. You’re known by 
the company you keep” (Robert Anderson, 
Tea and Sympathy, 1953). First recorded in 
1541 with different wording, the proverb 
appeared in 1591 in a book offering advice 
to those preparing for marriage: “If a man 
can be known by nothing else, then he may 
be known by his companions.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
birds of a feather flock together.
man is the measure of all things  Hu-
man beings are capable of rising to any 
challenge: “As of all things man is said the 
measure,/So your full merits measure 
forth a man” (George Chapman, Caesar 
and Pompey, 1631). Similar sentiments 
were voiced by Plato, but the earliest 
record of the proverb in English dates to 
1547, when it appeared in W. Baldwin’s 
Morall Phylosophie.
 man is the measure of all things
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   181 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
182
manners make the man  Good manners 
are of the utmost importance: Remember 
that manners make the man—you will be judged 
on how you behave, not on what you look like, 
where you come from, or who your parents are. 
First recorded c. 1350, the proverb was the 
motto of the bishop of Winchester, Eng-
land, William of Wykeham (1324–1404).
Variant of this proverb: manners 
maketh man.
man proposes, God disposes  Human 
plans and ambitions will come to noth-
ing unless God chooses to permit their 
realization: “‘he will allow you an income 
of 50,000 livres per annum during the 
whole time of your stay in Paris.’ ‘Then in 
that case I shall always choose to remain 
there.’ ‘You cannot control circumstances, 
my dear sir; “man proposes, and God dis-
poses”’ ” (Alexandre Dumas, The Count of 
Monte Cristo, 1844–45). First recorded in 
French in the early 14th century, the prov-
erb occurs in its Latin form, “homo propo-
nit, sed Deus disponit,” in Thomas à Kempis’s 
De Imitatione Christi (c. 1420), which was 
translated into English c. 1450.
man’s best friend is his dog  See a dog 
is a man’s best friend.
a man’s best reputation for the future 
is his record of the past  A person’s 
record of past achievement or conduct 
may be used to predict his or her future 
performance: A man’s best reputation for the 
future is his record of the past, so with a résumé 
like this you should have no diffi culty fi nding 
another job. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
man’s extremity is God’s opportunity 
People often turn to religion in times 
of crisis, and such times give God the 
opportunity to demonstrate his power: 
“In the fi rst winter of the war . . . we were 
all much encouraged by tales of a new 
thirst for religion among the majority 
of the men. . . . ‘Man’s extremity, God’s 
opportunity’” (E. A. Burroughs, The Valley 
of Decision, 1916). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1629.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the danger past and god forgotten.
a man’s got to do what a man’s got 
to do  You must do what needs to be 
done, or what you feel ought to be done, 
however unpleasant it may be; sometimes 
used facetiously: It won’t be easy, breaking 
the news to them, but a man’s got to do what 
a man’s got to do. The proverb is associated 
with the U.S. actor John Wayne, who 
used it in the movie Stagecoach (1939). It 
also occurs in John Steinbeck’s novel The 
Grapes of Wrath (1939): “I know this—a 
man got to do what he got to do.”
a man’s home is his castle  People have 
the right to privacy and freedom of action 
in their own home: “A man’s home is his 
castle—he can defend it with bazookas 
and machine guns if he knows where to 
get them” (Clifford Irving, The Campbell 
Murder Case, 1988). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1581 and enshrines a legal 
maxim stated by the English jurist Sir 
Edward Coke (1552–1634): “For a man’s 
house is his castle, et domus sua cuique tutis-
simum refugium [and each man’s home is 
his safest refuge].” It is sometimes adapted 
to different situations by substituting 
another word for home, as in “A man’s 
automobile is his castle.”
Variant of this proverb: an English-
man’s home is his castle.
manners make the man
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   182 1/29/07   5:12:47 PM
183
a man’s word is as good as his 
bond  Honorable people do not break 
their promises: I said I would repay the money 
before the end of the month, and I will do so—a 
man’s word is as good as his bond. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1500 in the form “A 
king’s word should be a king’s bond.”
Variants of this proverb: an hon-
est man’s word is as good as his bond; a 
gentleman’s word is his bond.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: promises, like piecrust, are made 
to be broken.
man’s work lasts till set of sun; woman’s 
work is never done  See a woman’s 
work is never done.
the man who is born in a stable is not a 
horse  A person does not necessarily have 
the stereotypical characteristics of the place 
where he or she was born: Teased at college 
about his Oklahoma origins, he used to reply, “The 
man who is born in a stable is not a horse.” The 
proverb is attributed to Arthur Wellesley, 
Duke of Wellington (1769–1852).
Variant of this proverb: because a 
man is born in a stable that does not make 
him a horse.
a man who is his own lawyer has a fool 
for his client  It is not wise to act as your 
own attorney in a court of law, or in some 
other legal process; also used in other fi elds 
of activity requiring professional expertise 
or objectivity: She decided to represent herself, 
despite our warnings that a man who is his own 
lawyer has a fool for his client, with disastrous 
consequences. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1809 in Philadelphia (Port Folio).
a man without a religion is a horse with-
out a bridle  Religion helps to guide a 
person through life, and control his or her 
behavior, just as a bridle is used to guide 
and control a horse: My grandmother was 
fairly tolerant in matters of religion, believing 
that everybody should be allowed to worship their 
own god, but she had no time for atheists. “A man 
without a religion is a horse without a bridle,” she 
used to say. The proverb is fi rst recorded in 
Robert Burton’s The Anatomy of Melancholy 
(1621). The proverb is of Latin origin: Homo 
sine religione, sicut equus sine freno.
a man wrapped up in himself makes a 
very small bundle  Self-centeredness is 
not a quality that is associated with great-
ness: Rather than wallowing in self-pity after 
the death of his wife, he threw himself into 
voluntary work for a number of good causes, 
on the basis that a man wrapped up in himself 
makes a very small bundle.
many a little makes a mickle  Small 
amounts accumulate to form a large quan-
tity; often used of small sums of money 
saved over a long period: “My mother 
used, upon all occasions, to inculcate some 
salutary axioms . . . and as I grew up, 
stored my memory with deeper observa-
tions; restrained me from the usual puer-
ile expenses, by remarking that MANY 
A LITTLE MADE A MICKLE” (Samuel 
Johnson, Essays, c. 1750). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1614, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin. 
Mickle is a dialect word for a large quantity. 
The variant form “Many a mickle makes a 
muckle” is actually meaningless, as muckle 
is synonymous with mickle.
Variant of this proverb: many a 
mickle makes a muckle.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every little helps; little and 
often fills the purse.
 many a little makes a mickle
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   183 1/29/07   5:12:48 PM
184
many are called, but few are chosen 
Not everybody who wants to do something 
is selected or permitted to do it; used in any 
elitist situation: Although some of the lesser-
known colleges and universities are desperate for 
students, in the case of Harvard and similarly 
prestigious institutions, many are called but few 
are chosen. The proverb is of biblical origin, 
occurring in this form in Matthew 22:14.
many a true word is spoken in jest 
Something said jokingly often proves to 
be true: Many a true word is spoken in jest, 
and the seeds of suspicion were sown in my 
mind when somebody fl ippantly remarked, 
regarding my wife’s strange behavior, “Perhaps 
she’s having an affair.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1665, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin, occurring in Chaucer’s Canterbury 
Tales (c.1390): “Be nat wrooth, my lord, 
though that I pleye./Ful ofte in game a 
sooth [truth] I have herd seye!”
Variant of this proverb: there’s many 
a true word said in jest.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
jesters do oft prove prophets.
many drops of water make an ocean  See 
little drops of water, little grains 
of sand, make a mighty ocean and a 
pleasant land.
many go out for wool and come home 
shorn  Many people who set out to 
make their fortune, or to achieve some 
other aim, end up in a worse state than 
before: “Some go intent on repairing the 
ravages of Epsom or Newmarket [English 
horse-racing events]; and in this specula-
tive section not a few . . . who go for 
wool come away shorn” (G. W. E. Russell, 
Sketches and Snapshots, 1910). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1599 in John 
Minsheu’s Spanish Dialogues.
many hands make light work  Work 
is quickly and easily done when many 
people help: Come on, many hands make 
light work, and if we all do our bit the house 
will be spotless again by the time my parents get 
back. Of ancient origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English c. 1330.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: too many cooks spoil the broth.
many kiss the hand they wish to see cut 
off  A person’s true feelings or intentions 
may be concealed by the mask of politeness 
or hypocrisy; used to warn against being 
deceived by such a show: Some were surprised 
to see him at the ceremony, knowing his intense 
dislike of everything the organization stands for, 
but many kiss the hand they wish to see cut off. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1599 in 
John Minsheu’s Spanish Dialogues.
March comes in like a lion and goes out 
like a lamb  The month of March often 
begins with wild, stormy weather and 
ends with mild, fair weather: Those who are 
still repairing the damage caused by the storms 
that struck the region earlier this month are 
hoping that the saying about March coming in 
like a lion and going out like a lamb will prove 
true. The proverb dates from before 1625 
(John Fletcher, A Wife for a Month).
Variant of this proverb: March is in 
like a lion, out like a lamb.
March winds and April showers always 
bring May fl owers  See april showers 
bring may flowers.
marriage is a lottery  Whether a mar-
riage succeeds or fails is all a matter of 
many are called, but few are chosen
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   184 1/29/07   5:12:48 PM
185
luck; also applied to the choice of a mar-
riage partner: If it’s true that marriage is a 
lottery, then my grandparents must be one of 
the couples that hit the jackpot. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1642 (Thomas 
Fuller’s Holy State).
marriages are made in heaven  Pro-
vidence decides who will marry whom: 
“I have always liked the sound of the 
phrase ‘a marriage has been arranged’
. . . . I prefer the idea of arrangement 
to that other statement, that marriages 
are made in Heaven” (Stella Gibbons, 
Cold Comfort Farm, 1932). The proverb 
was first recorded in 1567, in William 
Painter’s Palace of Pleasure: “True it is, 
that marriages be don in Heaven and 
performed in earth.” It has given rise 
to the figurative phrase a marriage made 
in heaven, describing an ideal marriage 
or any merger or combination of two 
parties or elements that are in perfect 
harmony.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
hanging and wiving go by destiny.
marry in haste, repent at leisure  Those 
who rush into marriage, and subsequently 
discover that they have made a mistake, 
may have to live with the unpleasant 
consequences for a long time: “‘Marry 
in haste and repent at leisure’ is a prov-
erb that may be borne in mind with 
advantage in the choice of a party as well 
as of a wife” (Sir William Stirling-Max-
well, Works, 1872). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1568. It is sometimes applied 
to other acts of rashness, with a different 
verb in place of marry.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: happy’s the wooing that’s not 
long a-doing.
marry in May, rue for aye  According 
to popular superstition, it is unlucky to 
marry in May: My mother was horrifi ed to 
hear that we had chosen May 15 for our wed-
ding day. “Marry in May, rue for aye!” she cried. 
I wonder what she would have said if she had 
lived to join us at our 50th anniversary cel-
ebrations last weekend. The proverb occurs 
in the writings of the Roman poet Ovid 
(43 b.c.–a.d. 18): “mense malum Maio 
nubere volgus ait [the common people say 
it is bad luck to marry in May].”
May chickens come cheeping  Children 
born in the month of May are weak and 
delicate: Born on May 20, 1902, he never 
had a day’s illness in his life and died at the 
grand old age of 98. So much for the proverb 
“May chickens come cheeping”! The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1868 in A. Hislop’s 
The Proverbs of Scotland.
meat and mass never hindered man  You 
can always fi nd time to eat and to go to 
church; said to somebody who claims to 
be too busy, or in too much of a hurry, 
for one or both of these: “Meat and mass 
never hindered man. The mass I cannot 
afford you, for we are all good Protes-
tants. But the meat I press on your atten-
tion” (Robert Louis Stevenson, Catriona, 
1893). The proverb dates from before 
1628.
medicine can prolong life, but death 
will seize the doctor, too  The power of 
medicine is limited, and everybody must 
die eventually: Those who expect miracles of 
the medical profession would do well to remem-
ber the saying “Medicine can prolong life, but 
death will seize the doctor too.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
death defies the doctor.
 medicine can prolong life, but death will seize the doctor, too
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   185 1/29/07   5:12:48 PM
186
the meek shall inherit the earth  Hu-
mility will ultimately be rewarded: “We 
have the highest authority for believing 
that the meek shall inherit the Earth; 
though I have never found any particular 
corroboration of this aphorism in the 
records of Somerset House [British reg-
istry of births, marriages, and deaths]” 
(F. E. Smith, Earl of Birkenhead, Contem-
porary Personalities, 1924). The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “Blessed are the meek: 
for they shall inherit the earth” (Matthew 
5:5). The facetious variant “The meek 
shall inherit the earth, but not its mineral 
rights” is attributed to the U.S. oil execu-
tive J. Paul Getty (1892–1976). Equally 
fl ippant is the modern variant “The geek 
shall inherit the earth.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
soft and fair goes far; softly, softly, 
catchee monkey.
men are blind in their own cause  Peo-
ple cannot be objective or think rationally 
in matters they feel very strongly about: 
It’s useless trying to reason with him—men are 
blind in their own cause. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in John Heywood’s 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: nobody should be judge in his own 
cause.
men are from Mars, women are from 
Venus  Men and women have essentially 
dissimilar natures: My mother and father 
never agreed about anything, but then, men 
are from Mars and women are from Venus. It 
achieved proverbial status after appearing 
as the title of the 1993 book Men Are from 
Mars, Women Are from Venus: A Practical Guide 
for Improving Communication and Getting 
What You Want in Your Relationships by John 
Gray. A jocular variant runs: “Men are 
from earth, women are from earth. Deal 
with it.”
men make houses, women make 
homes  Although men can build or buy 
property, it takes a woman to turn a 
house into a home: His apartment is very 
tastefully furnished, but it’s a bit austere 
and unwelcoming—as they say, “Men make 
houses, women make homes.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1938 in Selwyn Gur-
ney Champion’s Racial Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: men build 
houses, women build homes.
a merry heart makes a cheerful counte-
nance  Inward feelings of happiness are 
refl ected on the face: I’m supposed to greet 
the customers with a happy face, but what do 
I have to smile about? If a merry heart makes 
a cheerful countenance, it’s small wonder that 
I’m accused of looking miserable most of the 
time. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“A merry heart maketh a cheerful coun-
tenance: but by sorrow of the heart the 
spirit is broken” (Proverbs 15:13).
Variant of this proverb: the joy of the 
heart makes the face fair.
might makes right  In any dispute or 
contest, the more powerful party will 
prevail, regardless of justice: Might makes 
right, and litigation is a costly and futile exer-
cise when the defendant is one of the largest 
multinational companies in the world. First 
recorded in English in the early 14th 
century, the proverb is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the epic Pharsalia by the 
Roman poet Lucan (a.d. 39–65) “men-
suraque iuris vis erat [might was the mea-
sure of right].” The sentiment it expresses 
occurs even earlier, in Plato’s Republic 
the meek shall inherit the earth
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   186 1/29/07   5:12:48 PM
187
(fourth century b.c.): “justice is nothing 
else than the interest of the stronger.”
Variants of this proverb: might is 
right; might beats right.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
providence is always on the side of 
the big battalions.
the mill cannot grind with the water that 
is past  There is no point in looking back 
with regret on missed opportunities; used 
either to encourage people to take full 
advantage of the present or simply to dis-
courage them from yearning for the past: 
“It did no good to think back. The mill 
cannot grind with the water that is past, 
as the old people in the mountains used 
to say” (Guy Richards, Red Kill, 1980). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in Thomas 
Draxe’s Adages (1616).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: seize the day; take time by the 
forelock.
the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceedingly small  Retribution 
may be a long time in coming, but it 
cannot be avoided; also loosely applied 
to any slow or painstaking process: You 
may think you’ve got off scot-free, but just you 
wait—the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceedingly small. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1640 in the 
form “God’s mill grinds slow, but sure.” It 
originated in a line quoted by the Greek 
philosopher Sextus Empiricus (second 
century a.d.), which was subsequently 
used by the German poet Friedrich Von 
Logau (1604–55) in a poem ultimately 
translated into English by Henry Wad-
sworth Longfellow (1807–82): “Though 
the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceeding small;/Though with 
patience He stands waiting, with exact-
ness grinds He all.”
Variant of this proverb: the mills of 
God grind slowly, but they grind exceed-
ingly fi ne.
a mind is a terrible thing to waste  Ev-
erybody should make best use of the 
intellectual capacity they have: “We will 
launch a renaissance in education, in sci-
ence and learning. A mind is a terrible 
thing to waste” (Walter Mondale, New York 
Times, 1984). The proverb has been the 
slogan of the United Negro College Fund 
since 1972.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
mind unemployed is mind unenjoyed.
mind unemployed is mind unenjoyed  By 
failing to put your mind to use you fail to 
take advantage of the resources and plea-
sures it offers you: At his retirement party 
he announced that he had enrolled for a corre-
spondence course in sociology, on the basis of the 
proverb “Mind unemployed is mind unenjoyed.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a mind is a terrible thing to waste.
mind your own business  Concentrate 
upon your own affairs (rather than those 
of others): “The Devil has got a lot of 
maxims which his adherents . . . are not 
slow to use —‘Mind your own business’” 
(R. J. Mackenzie, Life, 1905). The proverb 
(now used more often as a rebuke to those 
who interfere in the business of others) 
was fi rst recorded in 1639 in J. Clarke’s 
Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina.
misery loves company  When you are 
unhappy, it is good to be with others who 
have suffered in a similar way, or simply 
with people who will listen to your woes 
 misery loves company
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   187 1/29/07   5:12:48 PM
188
and offer sympathy; also used to imply 
that miserable or unfortunate people like 
everybody around them to be in the same 
situation: Group therapy can be very effective 
in cases like these—misery loves company. The 
proverb dates from before 1349.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a trouble shared is a trouble halved.
misery makes strange bedfellows  See 
adversity makes strange bedfellows.
misfortunes never come singly  It is 
often the case that several misfortunes 
happen together, or in quick succession: 
“‘We are now without father: we shall 
soon be without home and brother,’ she 
murmured. At that moment a little acci-
dent supervened, which seemed decreed 
by fate purposely to prove the truth of 
the adage, that ‘misfortunes never come 
singly.’ . . . St. John passed the win-
dow reading a letter. He entered. ‘Our 
uncle John is dead,’ said he” (Charlotte 
Brontë, Jane Eyre, 1847). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, c. 1300. The sentiment it expresses 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play Hamlet (4:5), 
“When sorrows come, they come not 
single spies,/But in battalions.” The cur-
rent form of the proverb dates from the 
17th or 18th century.
Variants of this proverb: misfortunes 
seldom come alone; troubles never come 
singly.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it never rains but it pours.
a miss is as good as a mile  If you fail, 
the margin of failure is irrelevant: “He 
was very near being a poet—but a miss is 
as good as a mile, and he always fell short 
of the mark” (Sir Walter Scott, Journal, 
1825). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1614 in the form “An inch in a miss is as 
good as an ell.”
moderation in all things  Excess is to 
be avoided wherever possible: Too much 
strenuous exercise can be as bad for you as too 
little—moderation in all things. The prov-
erb comes from the Greek poet Hesiod’s 
Works and Days (eighth century b.c.) “mod-
eration is best in all things.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: enough is as good as a feast; 
enough is enough; there’s measure in 
all things.
Monday’s child is fair of face  Children 
born on a Monday are supposed to be 
good-looking: I was born on a Monday, but 
I sometimes fi nd it hard to believe the saying 
“Monday’s child is fair of face” when I look 
in the mirror! The proverb is the fi rst line 
of a traditional rhyme. See entries at the 
days of the week for other proverbs from 
this rhyme.
money begets money  It is easy to make 
more money when you already have some: 
“‘Wish I knew something about business.’ 
‘I can tell you all I know in one sentence. 
Money gets money’” (John Steinbeck, 
The Winter of Our Discontent, 1961). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in T. Wilson’s 
Discourse upon Usury (1572).
Variants of this proverb: money gets 
money; money makes money; money 
loves company.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it takes money to make money.
money burns a hole in the pocket  Peo-
ple are often too eager to spend their 
money: Money burns a hole in the pocket—
misery makes strange bedfellows
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   188 1/29/07   5:12:49 PM
189
my grandmother used to give me some money to 
take on vacation, and my parents always had to 
restrain me from spending it all on the fi rst day. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1530 in 
the works of Sir Thomas More: “A little 
wanton money which . . . burned out the 
bottom of his purse.”
money can’t buy happiness  Money 
cannot satisfy your emotional or spiritual 
needs: Money can’t buy happiness, as a num-
ber of lottery jackpot winners have discovered. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1792. 
Other words may be substituted for hap-
piness, such as love or friends.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: a heavy purse makes a light heart; 
a light purse makes a heavy heart.
money doesn’t grow on trees  Money is 
not easily earned or acquired; often said by 
a parent to a child who is constantly asking 
for money or who spends it unwisely: No, 
I won’t give you 100 dollars to buy a ticket for 
the concert. Money doesn’t grow on trees, you 
know. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1750. With another word in place of money 
it may be used in different situations, to 
indicate a scarcity of the specifi ed thing, 
as in “Jobs don’t grow on trees” or “Good 
teachers don’t grow on trees.”
money gets money  See money begets 
money.
money has no smell  Money that comes 
from unsavory or questionable sources is 
no different from—and no less acceptable 
than—money that comes from anywhere 
else: “The associations of the wealth 
scarcely affected him. He understood 
in the fl esh the deep wisdom of that old 
proverb . . . that money has no smell” 
(Arnold Bennett, Mr. Prohack, 1922). The 
proverb comes from a story about the 
Roman emperor Vespasian, whose son 
objected to a tax on public lavatories. 
Vespasian asked him to sniff a coin thus 
obtained, and he was forced to admit that 
it did not smell offensive. The proverb is 
sometimes quoted in the Latin form “Non 
olet [It does not smell].”
money isn’t everything  Money is not 
the only thing that matters: “He said quite 
angrily that money was not everything, 
there was the satisfaction of knowing 
you’d turned out a good job” (Flora 
Thompson, Still Glides the Stream, 1948). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1842 in 
the form “Money is not all.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the best things in life are free.
money is power  Wealthy people can have 
or do what they want: “‘Money is power,’ 
Lanny said. ‘Money commands respect and 
obedience from other people’” (Upton 
Sinclair, A World to Win, 1946). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1741 (N. Ames, 
Almanacs).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a golden key can open any door; 
money talks.
money is round and rolls away  Money 
is easily spent: Money is round and rolls 
away—despite my best efforts, I never seem 
to have any left at the end of the week. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1619 in 
Helpe to Discourse.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
riches have wings.
money is the root of all evil  Money 
is the cause of many undesirable human 
 money is the root of all evil
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   189 1/29/07   5:12:49 PM
190
qualities and the motivation for many 
wicked or immoral acts: He justifi ed the 
low wages he paid to his workers by quoting the 
proverb “Money is the root of all evil.” Based 
on a misquotation of the biblical saying 
“the love of money is the root of all evil” 
(1 Timothy 6:10), the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in its current form in 1777.The 
opposite view was put forward by Samuel 
Butler, in Erewhon (1872)—“The want 
of money is the root of all evil”—and 
George Bernard Shaw, in Man and Super-
man (1903): “Lack of money is the root 
of all evil.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the love of money is the root of all 
evil.
money loves company  See money 
begets money.
money makes a man  People are 
impressed by wealth, and have respect and 
admiration for those with money: “Money 
maketh a man; even if he was a monkey to 
start with” (D. H. Lawrence, letter dated 
May 7, 1920). The proverb dates from 
before 1500.
money makes money  See money begets 
money.
money makes the mare go  Money 
enables things to be done, and things are 
done faster or more readily for those 
who are willing and able to pay well: 
Money makes the mare go, and a not-too-
subtle display of wealth can work wonders 
in cutting through red tape. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1573 in the form 
“Money makes the horse to go,” but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Variant of this proverb: money makes 
the mare to go.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money makes the world go round.
money makes the world go round 
Money funds most human affairs: Ideal-
ism is all very well, but it’s money makes the 
world go round. This relatively modern 
proverb began life as a song title from the 
Fred Ebb and John Kander musical Caba-
ret (1966), although similar sentiments 
expressing virtually the same thing date 
back much earlier.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money makes the mare go.
money talks  Wealthy people have great 
infl uence: “‘At least I assume they are mil-
lionaires?’ ‘That is what they would like 
you to assume, certainly. And if money 
talks . . . they are certainly making the 
right amount of noise’” (Anita Brookner, 
Hotel du Lac, 1984). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection, in the form “Gold speaks.” A 
facetious variant is “Money talks, but all it 
says is goodbye.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a golden key can open any door; 
money is power.
monkey see, monkey do  Foolish people 
mindlessly copy others: On the basis of the 
saying “Monkey see, monkey do,” stunts like 
these have to be accompanied by the warn-
ing “Don’t try this at home” when shown on 
prime-time television. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1934 in Robert Hare’s Hand 
of the Chimpanzee (1934).
more die of food than famine  Exces-
sive indulgence in the wrong type of food 
money loves company
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   190 1/29/07   5:12:49 PM
191
is a bigger killer than famine: Posters bear-
ing the message “More die of food than famine,” 
part of a new campaign for healthy eating, 
have been criticized by some of the charitable 
organizations involved in overseas aid.
more haste, less speed  If you do things 
hurriedly, you will make more mistakes 
and ultimately take longer; often used to 
advise somebody to act more slowly or 
carefully: “Ah, those advisers!” said he. 
“If we had listened to them all we should 
not have made peace with Turkey and 
should not have been through with that 
war. Everything in haste, but more haste, 
less speed” (Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, 
1863–69). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1350 in the form “The more haste, the 
worse speed.”
Variant of this proverb: more haste, 
worse speed.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
always in a hurry, always behind.
the more said, the less done  The more 
things are talked about, the less likely 
they are to get done: We could talk about 
this all night, but the more said, the less done. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1760 in 
George Colman’s Polly Honeycombe: “It’s 
an old saying and a true one, The more 
there’s said the less there’s done.”
the more the merrier  The more people 
who take part, the more fun everybody 
will have, so extra people are always wel-
come: “Is it OK with you if Tom and Megan 
come along too?” “Sure, the more the merrier.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1340 in 
the alliterative poem Pearl.
the more things change, the more they 
stay the same  Things never change very 
much, and something thought to be new 
and different—or peculiar to the current 
age—is often very similar to something 
that has happened before: Reading 19th-
century literature, I am often struck by the truth 
of the proverb “The more things change, the more 
they stay the same.” The proverb originated 
in French, in Alphonse Karr’s Les Guêpes 
(1849): “Plus ça change, plus c’est la même 
chose,” and the French form is sometimes 
used by English speakers, often abbreviated 
to “Plus ça change.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in George Bernard 
Shaw’s The Revolutionists’ Handbook (1903).
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
history repeats itself; there’s nothing 
new under the sun.
the more you get, the more you 
want  Getting what you want only leads 
to a desire for more: “I was averaging 
eighty to a hundred a week. Well, you 
know how it is. The more you get the more 
you want” (George Harmon Coxe, The 
Glass Triangle, 1940). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, c. 1340 
in R. Rolle’s Psalter.
Variant of this proverb: the more you 
have, the more you want.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
much would have more.
the more you stir it, the worse it 
stinks  The more you investigate an unsa-
vory or dubious affair, the more unpleas-
ant details you discover: The more you stir 
it, the worse it stinks—it now appears that a 
number of major public fi gures were involved in 
the scandal, and the cover-up was coordinated 
by the president himself. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in John Heywood, 
Dialogue of Proverbs: “The more we stur a 
tourde [turd], the wours it will stynke.”
 the more you stir it, the worse it stinks
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   191 1/29/07   5:12:49 PM
192
Variant of this proverb: the more you 
stir a stink, the louder it smells.
morning dreams come true  According 
to popular superstition, the dreams you 
have in the early hours of the morning, 
or just before waking, are the most likely 
to come true: If morning dreams really do 
come true, then I’m in for an interesting day 
at work—I dreamed this morning that my 
boss was found wandering naked in the park-
ing lot! The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in this form in 1813, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin: in the 
second century b.c. the pastoral poet 
Moschus wrote, “at the third watch of 
the night, when dawn is near, . . . and 
when the fl ock of true dreams is out 
grazing.”
most people consider thrift a fi ne vir-
tue in ancestors  People are generally 
pleased when the thrift of their ancestors 
enables them to live comfortably without 
having to be too thrifty themselves: If it 
is true that most people consider thrift a fi ne 
virtue in ancestors, then the fortune amassed 
by his family over the generations should make 
him the envy of the nation.
a mother can take care of ten children, 
but sometimes ten children can’t take 
care of one mother  No matter how 
many children she raises, a woman is 
often neglected or abandoned by all of 
them in her old age: It’s not easy, with so 
many mouths to feed, but I try to put a little 
money away each week in case I end up in a 
nursing home. Maybe I’m cynical, but I believe 
there’s a lot of truth in the saying “A mother 
can take care of ten children, but sometimes ten 
children can’t take care of one mother.” The 
proverb is of Jewish origin.
the mother of mischief is no bigger than 
a midge’s wing  A great quarrel, or 
other major trouble, is often caused by 
something trivial: The mother of mischief 
is no bigger than a midge’s wing, and a 
throwaway remark about her sister’s in-laws 
led to a family feud that lasted for more than 
20 years. The proverb dates from before 
1628.
a mouse may help a lion  Small or 
lowly people can sometimes give valu-
able assistance to those who are greater 
or more powerful than themselves: “I 
only offer to show my gratitude by doing 
what I can. . . . A mouse may help a lion” 
(John Buchan, The House of the Four Winds, 
1935). The proverb comes from one of 
the fables of Aesop (sixth century b.c.), 
in which a mouse helps a lion caught in 
a trap by chewing through the ropes that 
bind it.
the mouse that has but one hole is 
quickly taken  Do not be dependent on 
one thing alone, or on a single possible 
course of action, but have other options 
in reserve: Be sure to have an alternative plan 
to fall back on if the fi rst one fails—remember 
that the mouse that has but one hole is quickly 
taken. Of ancient origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in Chaucer’s Can-
terbury Tales (c. 1390): “I holde a mouses 
herte nat worth a leek,/That hath but oon 
hole for to sterte to.”
Variant of this proverb: the mouse 
that has but one hole is soon caught.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t put all your eggs in one 
basket.
moving three times is as bad as a fi re 
See three moves are as bad as a fire.
morning dreams come true
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   192 1/29/07   5:12:49 PM
193
much coin, much care  People with a 
lot of money have much to worry about. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
1639 in J. Clarke’s Paroemiologia Anglo-
Latina, although it also appeared as far 
back as the Odes of Horace, who rendered 
it in the form: “Care follows increasing 
wealth.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: a heavy purse makes a light heart.
much cry and little wool  Those who 
make the most noise, the loudest boasts, 
or the greatest promises often have the 
least to offer, are the least productive, or 
simply fail to deliver the goods: “‘What 
noisy fellow is that in the next room?’ 
said Joe, when he had disposed of his 
breakfast, and had washed and brushed 
himself. ‘A recruiting serjeant,’ replied 
the Lion. . . . ‘And I wish . . . he was 
anywhere else but here. The party make 
noise enough, but don’t call for much. 
There’s great cry there, Mr Willet, but 
very little wool’” (Charles Dickens, Barn-
aby Rudge, 1841). The proverb dates from 
before 1475.
Variant of this proverb: great cry but 
little wool.
much smoke, little fi re  Often when 
there is most fuss about something, there 
is least cause for it: As usual with such stories 
in the press it was a case of much smoke, little 
fi re. It was fi rst recorded in 1639 in the 
Berkeley MSS.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: there’s no smoke without fire.
much water goes by the mill that the 
miller knows not of  Many things are 
stolen or go astray without the knowledge 
of the person affected: “What, man! More 
water glideth by the mill than wots the 
miller of ” (William Shakespeare, Titus 
Andronicus, 2:1).
much would have more  People are 
never satisfi ed with what they have: We 
gave them all we could spare, but much would 
have more—they returned under cover of 
darkness and robbed us while we slept. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1350 in 
Douce MS 52.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the more you get, the more you 
want.
murder will out  The crime of murder 
rarely goes undetected, and few murder-
ers escape justice: “Crimes cause their 
own detection, do they? And murder will 
out . . ., will it?” (Wilkie Collins, The 
Woman in White, 1860). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “Mordre wol 
out; that se we day by day,” but the senti-
ment it expresses is of earlier origin, and 
it recurs in a number of Shakespeare’s 
plays.
music hath charms to soothe the savage 
breast  Music can have a calming infl u-
ence on mind and spirit, or on violent 
people: The principle that music hath charms 
to soothe the savage breast is being tested by a 
new experimental form of therapy for hyperac-
tive and disruptive youngsters, which involves 
periods of gentle exercise accompanied by 
classical music. The proverb comes from 
William Congreve’s play The Mourning 
Bride (1697): “Music has charms to soothe 
a savage breast,/To soften rocks, or bend 
a knotted oak.” The variant is a common 
misquotation. Shakespeare expressed a 
similar—but more disturbing—sentiment 
 music hath charms to soothe the savage breast
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   193 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
194
in his play Measure for Measure (4:1): “music 
oft hath such a charm/To make bad good, 
and good provoke to harm.”
Variant of this proverb: music has 
charms to soothe the savage beast.
my son is my son till he gets him a wife, 
but my daughter’s my daughter all the 
days of her life  See a son is a son till 
he gets him a wife, a daughter’s a 
daughter all of her life.
my son is my son till he gets him a wife, but my daughter’s my daughter . . .
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   194 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
ååå   å
195
nature abhors a vacuum  There are no 
defi ciencies in nature—whenever a gap or 
vacancy occurs, something or somebody 
will come along to fi ll it: “Whatever phi-
losophy may determine of material nature, 
it is certainly true of intellectual nature, 
that it abhors a vacuum: our minds cannot 
be empty” (Samuel Johnson, letter dated 
June 20, 1771). Of ancient origin, the 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1551, in Thomas Cranmer’s Answer to Gar-
diner: “Naturall reason abhorreth vacuum.”
nature does nothing in vain Nothing in 
nature happens without a purpose: The 
death of some insects immediately after laying 
their eggs may seem tragic, but nature does 
nothing in vain. A proverb that dates back 
to Aristotle, it was fi rst recorded in En-
glish c. 1580 in G. Harvey’s Marginalia.
nature passes nurture  A person’s 
inborn character, or inherited character-
istics, cannot be changed by his or her 
upbringing: They worked hard to give him the 
best education that money could buy, but nature 
passes nurture, and their efforts were wasted. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1492 in 
the form “Nature goes before learning.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: nature will have its course; what’s 
bred in the bone will come out in the 
flesh; you can drive out nature with 
a pitchfork but she keeps on coming 
back; you can take the boy out of the 
country but you can’t take the coun-
try out of the boy.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: as the twig is bent, so is the tree 
inclined; birth is much but breeding 
more; nurture passes nature.
nature will have its course  There is no 
denying natural processes or impulses: 
She tried to keep her doubts to herself but 
nature will have its course. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded c. 1400 in Beryn.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: nature passes nurture; you can 
drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back.
the nearer the bone, the sweeter the 
fl esh  Thin people are more attractive 
or desirable; also used literally of meat: I 
would describe her as skinny rather than slim, 
but the nearer the bone, the sweeter the fl esh, 
as my father used to say. The proverb dates 
from before 1398.
Variant of this proverb: the closer to 
the bone, the sweeter the meat.
the nearer the church, the farther from 
God  People who are active members 
or offi cials of a church are often the least 
godly in their daily lives; also applied to 
n
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   195 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
196
those who live close to a church: “I fear it 
was a practical comment on the truth of 
the uncomfortable proverb, ‘The nearer 
the church, the farther from God,’ that 
so bad a district should adjoin one of the 
great headquarters of the church” (Jane 
Ellice Hopkins, Work amongst Working Men, 
1879). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1303.
near is my shirt, but nearer is my skin  A 
person’s own best interests take prece-
dence over those of his or her friends and 
family: I’m not prepared to sacrifi ce my own 
chances of success for the sake of my brother—
near is my shirt, but nearer is my skin. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1570, in the 
form “Nearer is my skin than shirt,” but 
the sentiment it expresses occurs in the 
writings of the Roman dramatist Plautus 
(c. 250–184 b.c.): “tunica propior palliost 
[my tunic is closer than my cloak].”
Variants of this proverb: close sits my 
shirt, but closer my skin; near is my kirtle, 
but nearer is my smock.
necessity is the mother of invention 
When people have an urgent need or a 
diffi cult problem, they use their creativ-
ity and imagination to devise a solution: 
“I soled my shoes with wood, which I cut 
from a tree . . . necessity is the mother of 
invention” (Jonathan Swift, Gulliver’s Trav-
els, 1726). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in its current form in 1658, but the senti-
ment it expresses is of earlier origin.
necessity knows no law  Rules and laws 
are often broken at times of emergency or 
urgent need: It went against all my principles 
to steal the food, but necessity knows no law, 
and my children were starving. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1377, in William 
Langland’s Piers Plowman: “Nede . . . hath 
no lawe.” It also exists in the Latin form 
“Necessitas non habet legem [Necessity has 
no law].”
necessity sharpens industry  Need 
makes people work harder: With heavy rain 
forecast for the following day, I knew I only had a 
few hours left to fi x the roof and I worked harder 
than ever before—necessity sharpens industry.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
need makes the old wife trot.
need makes the old wife trot  Neces-
sity provides a sense of urgency: “Stimu-
lated by the spur which maketh the 
old woman proverbially to trot, Swertha 
posted down to the hamlet, with all the 
speed of threescore” (Sir Walter Scott, 
The Pirate, 1822). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1225.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
necessity sharpens industry.
needs must when the devil drives  There 
are times when people are forced to 
do things that they would not do under 
normal circumstances: I had never killed 
an animal before, and I had no desire to kill 
this one, but needs must when the devil drives. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1450 
in the form “He must needs go that the 
devil drives.”
Variant of this proverb: needs must 
when necessity drives.
ne’er cast a clout till May be out  Do 
not stop wearing any item of warm 
winter clothing before the end of May: 
A sudden change in the weather made us glad 
that we had heeded the old proverb “Ne’er 
cast a clout till May be out.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1706, in a Span-
near is my shirt, but nearer is my skin
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   196 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
197
ish/English dictionary, in the form “Do 
not leave off your coat till May be past.” 
Clout is a British dialect word meaning 
“rag,” and the proverb is sometimes 
taken to refer to old clothes, as in Rob-
ert Graves’s The White Goddess (1948): 
“In ancient Greece, as in Britain, this 
was the month in which people went 
about in old clothes—a custom referred 
to in the proverb ‘Ne’er cast a clout ere 
May be out,’ meaning ‘do not put on 
new clothes until the unlucky month 
is over.’” It is sometimes wrongly sug-
gested that the word May in the proverb 
refers to may blossom—that is, the 
hawthorn or a similar shrub.
Variants of this proverb: change not 
a clout till May be out; what you put off 
and what you put on, never change till 
May be gone.
neglect will kill an injury sooner than 
revenge  Insults and other malicious acts 
are forgotten most quickly when the 
victim chooses to ignore them: “Neglect 
kills injuries; revenge increases them” 
(Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard’s Alma-
nack, 1733–58). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1620 in Owen Felltham’s 
Resolves, Divine, Morall, Politicall.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: forgive and forget; let bygones 
be bygones.
neither a borrower nor a lender be  It 
is advisable never to borrow or lend 
anything, specifi cally money: “Neither a 
borrower nor a lender be” is a lesson I learned 
too late, after losing $200 and the friend 
who borrowed it. The proverb comes from 
Shakespeare’s play Hamlet (1:3; 1600–01) 
and is part of Polonius’s advice to his son 
Laertes.
neither give nor take offense  Try to 
avoid offending anybody, and ignore any 
apparent slights or insults directed at you: 
The best way to avoid being drawn into an 
argument or fi ght is to follow the golden rule 
“Neither give nor take offense.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1948 in a U.S. prov-
erb collection.
Variant of this proverb: neither take 
offense nor make offense.
Nero fi ddled while Rome burned  Peo-
ple in positions of authority sometimes 
behave irresponsibly during a crisis: Nero 
fi ddled while Rome burned, and the presi-
dent was more concerned with improving his 
golf handicap than trying to avert a strike 
that would cripple the company. The prov-
erb refers to the legend that in a.d. 64 
Emperor Nero set fi re to the city of Rome 
and played his lyre while it burned.
never ask pardon before you are 
accused  If nobody knows that you have 
done something wrong, do not apologize 
and reveal your guilt—you may get away 
with it: With a bit of luck he won’t notice the 
scratch on the car where I hit the wall, so I’m 
saying nothing. My policy is “Never ask pardon 
before you are accused.”
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: he who excuses himself accuses 
himself.
never choose your women or linen by 
candlelight  Soft or inadequate lighting 
can give people and things a deceptively 
attractive appearance, or hide their faults 
and fl aws: The proverb “Never choose your 
women or linen by candlelight” may sound 
old-fashioned, but if you replace candlelight 
with the lights of a disco or nightclub, there 
are many young men who will vouch for its 
 never choose your women or linen by candlelight
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   197 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
198
wisdom. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1573. Other versions of the proverb 
advise against choosing gold or horses in 
this way.
Variant of this proverb: choose nei-
ther a woman nor linen by candlelight.
never do evil that good may come of it 
A wicked or immoral course of action 
cannot be vindicated by a worthy objec-
tive: She remained fi rmly opposed to animal 
experimentation—even for medical research 
into lifesaving drugs—on the basis of the 
proverb “Never do evil that good may come 
of it.” The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“And not rather (as we be slanderously 
reported, and as some affi rm that we 
say), Let us do evil, that good may come?” 
(Romans 3:8).
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the end justifies the means.
never do things by halves  Whatever 
you do, do it properly, not in a half-
hearted manner: The general did not call a 
halt until the whole town was destroyed, but 
he was never one to do things by halves. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1753 in 
Hanway’s Travels.
Variant of this proverb: do well and 
have well.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if a thing’s worth doing, it’s 
worth doing well; in for a penny, 
in for a pound; one might as well be 
hanged for a sheep as for a lamb.
never give a sucker an even break 
Foolish or gullible people are easily 
exploited and do not deserve a fair 
chance; used to justify taking advantage 
of such a person: “Never give a sucker 
an even break. . . . But your sermon has 
made me see that there is something 
higher and nobler than a code of business 
ethics” (P. G. Wodehouse, Eggs, Beans and 
Crumpets, 1940). Of uncertain origin, the 
proverb was popularized from the 1920s 
onward by the U.S. actor W. C. Fields 
(1880–1946), who wrote and starred in 
a fi lm with this title in 1941.
never is a long time  Think carefully 
before you use the word never, which implies 
a certainty about the future that you cannot 
possess: He swore that he would never betray my 
secret, but never is a long time, and I fear that I 
may live to regret taking him into my confi dence. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1721, in 
the form “Never is a long term,” but the 
sentiment it expresses occurs in Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales (c. 1390).
Variant of this proverb: never is a 
long day.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never say never.
never judge by appearances  See judge 
not according to appearances.
never let the sun go down on your 
anger  If you have quarreled or lost your 
temper with somebody, make your peace 
before the end of the day: I believe that you 
should never let the sun go down on your anger, 
and I always insist that the children resolve any 
minor differences among themselves before they 
go to bed. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun 
go down upon your wrath” (Ephesians 
4:26).
Variant of this proverb: let not the 
sun go down on your wrath.
never let your education interfere with 
your intelligence  There are times when 
never do evil that good may come of it
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   198 1/29/07   5:12:50 PM
199
you must trust your intuition or native 
wit rather than what you have been 
taught or what you have read: In emergen-
cies such as these, medical professionals often 
have to follow their common sense rather than 
their textbooks, on the basis of the saying 
“Never let your education interfere with your 
intelligence.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
an ounce of common sense is worth a 
pound of theory.
never look a gift horse in the 
mouth  When you are offered some-
thing for nothing, accept it with grati-
tude and do not fi nd fault with it: “Mr. 
Featherstone eyed him again over his 
spectacles and presented him with a little 
sheaf of notes. . . . He took them, saying, 
‘I am very much obliged to you, sir,’ and 
was going to roll them up without seem-
ing to think of their value. But this did 
not suit Mr. Featherstone, who was eying 
him intently. ‘Come, don’t you think it 
worth your while to count ’em? . . .’ ‘I 
thought I was not to look a gift-horse in 
the mouth, sir. But I shall be very happy 
to count them’” (George Eliot, Middle-
march, 1871–72). The proverb alludes to 
the practice of examining a horse’s teeth 
to ascertain its age. It was fi rst recorded 
in this form in 1546, but the sentiment 
it expresses dates from the fi fth century 
a.d. or earlier.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
beggars can’t be choosers.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: beware of greeks bearing gifts.
never marry for money, but marry where 
money is  It is good to marry somebody 
with suffi cient means for a comfortable life, 
but wealth should not be your sole criterion 
in choosing a marriage partner: She could do 
a lot worse than marry young Jack Piper, who 
has a promising legal career ahead of him. As 
my grandmother used to say, “Never marry for 
money, but marry where money is.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1870 in Alfred, Lord 
Tennyson’s “Northern Farmer.”
Variant of this proverb: don’t marry for 
money, but don’t marry without money.
never mention a rope in the house of a 
man who has been hanged  See never 
speak of rope in the house of a man 
who has been hanged.
never mix business with pleasure  Keep 
your working life separate from your pri-
vate affairs and leisure activities: They say 
you should never mix business with pleasure, 
but I see no harm in doing a little networking 
at social functions like these. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1913.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t 
mix business and pleasure.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
business is business.
never put off until tomorrow what 
you can do today  If something needs 
doing—however undesirable the task may 
be—the sooner you do it, the better: “No 
idleness, no laziness, no procrastination; 
never put off till tomorrow what you can 
do today” (Lord Chesterfi eld, letter dated 
December 26, 1749). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1616, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of earlier origin. The face-
tious variant “Never do today what you 
can put off until tomorrow” dates from 
the 19th century.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: procrastination is the thief of 
time; today is yesterday’s tomorrow.
 never put off until tomorrow what you can do today
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   199 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
200
never say A without saying B  See who 
says a must say b.
never say die  Do not surrender, stop 
trying, or give up hope: The fi rst few months 
will be very diffi cult, and you may feel that 
success is beyond your grasp, but never say die. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1837 in 
Charles Dickens’s novel The Pickwick Papers.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t give up the ship; while 
there’s life, there’s hope.
never say never  Nobody can look far 
enough into the future to say with 
certainty that something will never hap-
pen—anything is possible: “Al Marshall 
did not rule out a resumption of talks, 
saying ‘you can never say “never” in this 
business’” (Washington Post, 1984). First 
recorded in 1977, the proverb was used 
in the title of the James Bond movie 
Never Say Never Again (1983), allegedly 
because the actor Sean Connery had 
been persuaded to make a comeback 
as Agent 007, 12 years after announc-
ing that he would never play the role 
again.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never is a long time.
never sell America short  Do not belit-
tle or underestimate the potential of 
America: “Speculation ran wild, and an 
orgy of boom-or-bust trading pushed the 
bull markets up to dizzy peaks. ‘Never sell 
America short’ and ‘Be a bull on America’ 
were favorite catchwords” (Thomas A. 
Bailey, The American Pageant, 1966). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1866.
never send a boy to do a man’s job  Do 
not assign a diffi cult task to somebody 
who lacks the strength, experience, or 
qualifi cations to do it properly; also used 
of inanimate objects, such as an inad-
equate piece of equipment or a low card 
that fails to win a trick: I should have 
known better than to put O’Connor in charge 
of the investigation—never send a boy to do a 
man’s job. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1931.
never show your teeth unless you can 
bite  See if you can’t bite, never show 
your teeth.
never speak ill of the dead  You should 
not make disparaging or defamatory 
remarks about people after their death: 
I know that you should never speak ill of the 
dead, but I’m not sure that I can think of 
anything good to say about her. Of ancient 
origin, the proverb is sometimes quoted 
in its Latin form, “De mortuis nil nisi bonum 
[Say nothing but good of the dead].”
Variant of this proverb: speak well 
of the dead.
never speak of rope in the house of a 
man who has been hanged  Be tactful 
and steer clear of sensitive subjects in the 
company of people who might be upset or 
offended by them: I was just about to tell Bill 
and Maggie a funny story about my neighbor 
setting his kitchen on fi re when I remembered 
that Bill’s sister and brother-in-law were killed 
in a hotel blaze several years ago, and you 
should never speak of rope in the house of a 
man who has been hanged. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1599 in the form “A man 
ought not to make mention of a halter in 
the house of a man that was hanged.”
Variant of this proverb: never men-
tion a rope in the house of a man who has 
been hanged.
never say A without saying B
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   200 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
201
never tell tales out of school  Do not 
pass on confi dential information, secrets, 
or gossip to others, especially to outsid-
ers: New employees of the royal household are 
obliged to sign a confi dentiality document, the 
content of which can be summarized by the 
proverb “Never tell tales out of school.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1530.
never too old to learn  See it’s never 
too late to learn.
never trouble trouble till trouble trou-
bles you  Do not anticipate future prob-
lems—wait until something troublesome 
needs to be dealt with before taking any 
action: It might be better to turn a blind eye 
to the situation unless it threatens to get out 
of hand—never trouble trouble till trouble 
troubles you. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1884 in Folk-Lore Journal. It is sometimes 
quoted as part of a rhyme: “Never trouble 
trouble till trouble troubles you,/You only 
double trouble and trouble others too.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: don’t meet troubles halfway; let 
sleeping dogs lie.
never work with children or animals  The 
unpredictability of children and animals 
make them unreliable as fellow-workers 
(a favorite maxim of actors and other 
entertainers but also used in many other 
contexts): He learned the hard way the truth 
of never working with children or animals when 
a small boy kicked him in the shin and he was 
bitten by a pet rat, both on camera. A proverb 
of U.S. origin, it was popularized by (and 
possibly coined by) comedian W. C. Fields.
a new broom sweeps clean  When a 
new person takes up a position of author-
ity in an organization, he or she is likely 
to make radical changes: “New brooms 
sweep clean. Abbot Thomas, like most of 
his predecessors, began with attempts at 
reformation” (J. A. Froude, Short Studies, 
1877). First recorded in 1546, the prov-
erb has given rise to the fi gurative phrase 
new broom meaning “somebody newly 
appointed to a position of authority”: Talk 
about a new broom! When the new principal 
came into school she reorganized everything—
and everyone!—in her fi rst term.
Variant of this proverb: a new broom 
sweeps clean, but an old broom knows all 
the corners.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
new lords, new laws.
a new day, a new dollar  See another 
day, another dollar.
new lords, new laws  When a new ruler 
or government comes to power—or 
when a new person takes control of a 
situation—changes are made and differ-
ent rules apply: “‘What’s yer hurry then, 
Laban?’ inquired Coggan. ‘You used to 
bide as late as the latest.’ ‘Well, ye see, 
neighbours, I was lately married to a 
woman, and she’s my vocation now. . . . ’ 
The young man halted lamely. ‘New lords 
new laws, as the saying is, I suppose,’ 
remarked Coggan” (Thomas Hardy, Far 
from the Madding Crowd, 1874). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in the mid-16th 
century, but with the implication that it 
had long been in general use.
Variant of this proverb: new lairds 
make new laws.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a new broom sweeps clean.
nice guys fi nish last  It is sometimes 
necessary to be ruthless and aggressive—
 nice guys fi nish last
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   201 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
202
even cruel or unscrupulous—to get what 
you want: He’s the kindest, most considerate 
person I’ve ever worked with, but he’s a loser—
everybody knows that nice guys fi nish last. 
The proverb was coined in the mid-20th 
century by the U.S. baseball manager Leo 
Durocher and used in 1975 as the title of 
his autobiography.
night brings counsel  If you have a dif-
fi cult problem to solve or an important 
decision to make, a good night’s sleep 
will work wonders: Night brings counsel, 
and I woke up the following morning with a 
new plan of action that couldn’t possibly fail. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in 1590, in Edmund Spenser’s The Faerie 
Queene, but the sentiment it expresses is 
of ancient origin: the Greek poet and dra-
matist Menander (c. 342–292 b.c.) wrote, 
“at night comes counsel to the wise.”
nine tailors make a man  A well-dressed 
person does not buy all his or her clothes 
from the same source: They say that nine 
tailors make a man, so don’t be afraid of sporting 
several different designer labels at the same time. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1647; its variant form was fi rst recorded 
34 years earlier. The original sense was that 
a gentleman should choose his garments 
from a wide range of tailors. The expression 
is also sometimes linked to bell-ringing: a 
tailor being a teller or “stroke” in a funeral 
knell: nine tailors referred to a man (six, a 
woman; three, a child); compare Dorothy 
Sayers’s mystery The Nine Tailors (1934).
Variant of this proverb: two tailors 
go to a man.
nobody believes a liar when he speaks 
the truth  See a liar is not believed 
when he tells the truth.
nobody ever went broke underestimat-
ing the intelligence of the American 
people  There is much money to be made 
by exploiting the gullibility or poor taste 
of the general public: It should have been 
obvious to anybody that the devices couldn’t pos-
sibly work, but they sold like hotcakes—nobody 
ever went broke underestimating the intelligence 
of the American people. The proverb was 
coined in 1926 by the U.S. journalist H. L. 
Mencken in the form “No one in this world 
. . . has ever lost money by underestimat-
ing the intelligence of the great masses of 
the plain people.” The word intelligence is 
sometimes replaced by taste.
nobody forgets a good teacher  A good 
teacher is long remembered by his or her 
pupils: “They were surprised by the num-
ber of people who wanted to add their 
names to the tribute, but nobody forgets 
a good teacher.” It appears to be a prov-
erb of 20th-century invention. It enjoyed 
renewed circulation in the late 1990s as 
the slogan of a UK government campaign 
to recruit more teachers.
nobody is above the law  Everybody 
must obey the law of the land: “Declaring 
that ‘no one is above the law,’ a federal 
prosecutor yesterday urged that former 
Pentagon offi cial Paul Thayer be put behind 
bars for his part in a $3 million illegal stock 
trading scheme” (Boston Globe, 1985). The 
proverb comes from a speech made by 
President Theodore Roosevelt in 1903.
Variant of this proverb: no man is 
above the law, and no man is below it.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the king can do no wrong.
nobody is born learned; bishops are 
made of men  Education and scholar-
night brings counsel
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   202 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
203
ship are not innate qualities, and anybody 
can acquire knowledge or aspire to high 
offi ce: When students try to blame their failure 
or lack of ambition on a deprived family back-
ground, I remind them of the saying “Nobody is 
born learned; bishops are made of men.”
nobody is indispensable  Nobody is so 
important or well qualifi ed that he or 
she cannot be replaced by another: The 
dismissal of the vice president was a salutary 
reminder that nobody is indispensable in this 
organization.
Variant of this proverb: no man is 
necessary.
nobody is infallible  Nobody can claim 
to be always right and never to have made 
a mistake: She may be the world’s greatest 
expert on the subject, but nobody is infallible, 
and in this case I am sure she is wrong. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1880.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: homer sometimes nods; to err is 
human, to forgive divine.
nobody is perfect  Everybody has his 
or her faults; often said in response to 
criticism. “We ain’t none of us perfect 
that I knows of ” (L. Hollingworth, Death 
Leaves Us Naked, 1931). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1805, in Gouverneur 
Morris’s Diary of the French Revolution.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
let him who is without sin cast the 
first stone.
nobody should be judge in his own 
cause  People cannot be objective in 
matters that concern themselves: “No man 
is a good judge in his own cause. I believe 
I am tolerably impartial” (John Wesley, let-
ter dated November 3, 1775). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded c. 1449 and is a 
translation of the Latin legal maxim “Nemo 
debet esse iudex in propria causa.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
men are blind in their own cause.
a nod’s as good as a wink to a blind 
horse  In certain circumstances only the 
smallest hint is needed to make yourself 
understood; also used to imply that any 
kind of hint is wasted on somebody who 
is determined not to take it: “You needn’t 
say no more—a nod’s as good as a wink to 
a blind horse” (Sean O’Casey, The Shadow 
of a Gunman, 1925). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1794, in William Godwin’s 
novel Caleb Williams.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a word to the wise is sufficient.
no good deed goes unpunished  When 
you do something kind or helpful you 
often get something unpleasant in return; 
a cynical observation: A million dollars had 
been spent on a new gym for the prison earlier 
in the year, but no good deed goes unpunished, 
and the rioting prisoners found some useful 
makeshift weapons among the new equipment. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1938 in 
the form “Every good deed brings its own 
punishment.” It has been attributed to a 
number of people, including the writers 
Oscar Wilde and Clare Boothe Luce, but 
it is of unknown origin.
no joy without annoy  Happiness is 
always accompanied by some sorrow or 
trouble: No joy without annoy, but we were 
determined not to let the bad news from 
home spoil our honeymoon. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “For 
evere the latter ende of joye is wo.”
 no joy without annoy
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   203 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
204
Variant of this proverb: no joy with-
out alloy.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
there’s no pleasure without pain; 
there’s no rose without a thorn.
no man can call again yesterday  See 
yesterday will not be called again.
no man can serve two masters  Nobody 
can be loyal or committed to two differ-
ent causes, organizations or employers 
simultaneously: “Men cannot serve two 
masters. If this cant of serving their coun-
try once takes hold of them, good-bye 
to the authority of the Church” (George 
Bernard Shaw, Saint Joan, 1924). The 
proverb is of biblical origin: “No man can 
serve two masters: for either he will hate 
the one, and love the other; or else he will 
hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye 
cannot serve God and mammon” (Mat-
thew 6:24).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: you can’t serve god and mammon; 
you can’t run with the hare and 
hunt with the hounds.
no man is above the law, and no man is 
below it  See nobody is above the law.
no man is a hero to his valet  The bet-
ter you know somebody, with all his or 
her faults and weaknesses, the less likely 
you are to regard that person with awe 
or veneration: “It has been said . . . that 
no man is a hero to his valet de chambre; 
now I am afraid when you and I grow a 
little more intimate . . . you will be hor-
ribly disappointed in your high expecta-
tions” (Samuel Foote, The Patron, 1764). 
The proverb is attributed to the Parisian 
hostess Anne-Marie Bigot de Cornuel 
(1605–94), in the French form “Il n’y a 
pas de héros pour son valet-de-chambre,” but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin. Lord Byron turned the proverb 
around to express high praise in his mock-
heroic poem Beppo (1818): “In short, he 
was a perfect cavaliero,/And to his very 
valet seem’d a hero.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
familiarity breeds contempt.
no man is an island  Nobody can func-
tion in total isolation from the rest of soci-
ety: Those who aim for self-suffi ciency—in a 
material or spiritual sense—eventually discover 
that no man is an island; we are all dependent, 
to a greater or lesser extent, on one another. 
The proverb comes from the English poet 
John Donne’s “Devotions upon Emergent 
Occasions” (1624): “No man is an Island, 
entire of it self; every man is a piece of the 
Continent, a part of the main.”
no man is necessary  See nobody is 
indispensable.
no moon, no man  According to popular 
superstition, a child born at the time of 
the new moon—that is, when there is no 
moon visible in the sky—will not survive 
to adulthood: “‘No moon, no man.’ ’Tis 
one of the truest sayings ever spit out. The 
boy never comes to anything that’s born at 
new moon” (Thomas Hardy, The Return of 
the Native, 1879). The quotation is the fi rst 
recorded use of the proverb, but implies 
that it is already well known.
no names, no pack-drill  If no names 
are mentioned, nobody can be punished 
or held responsible for something: The 
report does not specify which companies are the 
worst offenders—no names, no pack-drill. The 
no man can call again yesterday
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   204 1/29/07   5:12:51 PM
205
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1923 (O. 
Onions, Peace in our Time). Pack-drill is a 
form of military punishment that involves 
marching up and down with a full load of 
equipment.
none but the brave deserve the 
fair  Those who lack boldness or cour-
age do not deserve to achieve great things; 
also used more literally, of men courting 
women—or vice versa: Firmly believing—
at the tender age of ten—that none but the 
brave deserve the fair, she spurned the advances 
of any boy who couldn’t hold his own in a 
playground battle. The proverb comes from 
John Dryden’s poem “Alexander’s Feast” 
(1697), referring to Alexander the Great 
and the courtesan Thais: “Happy, happy, 
happy pair! . . . /None but the brave 
deserves the fair.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
faint heart never won fair lady.
no news is good news  It is probably 
safe to assume that all is well if you 
have not heard anything to the contrary: 
“Everywhere, women gathered in knots, 
huddled in groups . . . telling each other 
that no news is good news, trying to com-
fort each other” (Margaret Mitchell, Gone 
with the Wind, 1936). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1616 in the form “No news is 
better than evil news.”
no pain, no gain  Nothing can be 
achieved without effort, suffering, or 
hardship; often applied specifi cally to 
physical exercise: Some medical experts 
are concerned that those who follow the phi-
losophy of “No pain, no gain” in their sports 
training could be doing irreparable dam-
age to their bodies. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1577 in the form “They must 
take pain that look for any gain.” The 
more concise form “No pains, no gains” 
was used in 1648 as the title of a poem 
by Robert Herrick.
Variants of this proverb: there are no 
gains without pains; no sweat, no sweet.
no penny, no paternoster  Religious 
services must be paid for in advance; also 
loosely applied to any similar business 
arrangement: I accept that the church needs 
to raise money for essential repairs, but to me 
this new appeal, with the conditions attached to 
it, smacks of the old motto “No penny, no pater-
noster.” The proverb was fi rst re cord ed in 
1528, but with the implication that it was 
already in common use.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
nothing for nothing.
the north wind doth blow and we shall 
have snow  Winds that blow from the 
north often bring cold weather with them: 
Everyone in this part of the world knows that 
when the north wind doth blow snow is surely 
on the way. The proverb has its origins in 
a nursery rhyme: “The north wind doth 
blows,/And we shall have snow,/And 
what will poor Robin do then? Poor 
thing!” (Songs for Nursery, 1805).
no sweat, no sweet  See no pain, no 
gain.
nothing can bring you peace but your-
self  Do not rely on others for reas-
surance, contentment, or security: After 
wasting thousands of dollars on therapists and 
analysts, she came to the conclusion that there 
is a lot of truth in the saying “Nothing can 
bring you peace but yourself. ” The proverb 
comes from Ralph Waldo Emerson’s essay 
“Self-Reliance” (1841).
 nothing can bring you peace but yourself
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   205 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
206
nothing comes of nothing  Nothing 
can be produced from nothing, therefore 
everything must originate from some-
thing; also used to imply that if you do or 
contribute nothing, you will get nothing 
in return: “You are to give me all your 
business. . . . If you have none, the learned 
gentleman here knows nothing can come 
of nothing” (Sir Walter Scott, The Heart of 
Midlothian, 1818). The proverb occurs in 
the writings of the Greek poet Alcaeus 
(sixth century b.c.) and also exists in the 
Latin form “Ex nihilo nihil fi t.” The variant 
“Nothing will come of nothing” comes 
from Shakespeare’s play King Lear (1:1).
Variants of this proverb: nothing will 
come of nothing; from nothing, nothing 
is made.
nothing for nothing  Everything must 
be paid for, in money or in kind: Nothing 
for nothing—you get me a seat on the next 
fl ight to Rio, and I’ll give you a story that’ll 
knock everything else off the front page. The 
proverb dates from before 1704.
Variants of this proverb: you get 
nothing for nothing; you never get any-
thing for nothing.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: no penny, no paternoster; you 
don’t get something for nothing.
nothing goes over the back but that 
comes under the belly  See what’s got 
over the devil’s back is spent under 
his belly.
nothing is certain but death and 
taxes  Death will come to everybody 
and taxes must be paid, but everything 
else in life is unpredictable, insecure, or 
avoidable: “Everything’s more or less a 
gamble. . . . Nothing is certain but death 
and taxes” (Laura Ingalls Wilder, By the 
Shores of Silver Lake, 1939). Although 
Daniel Defoe used the phrase “things 
as certain as death and taxes” in 1726, 
the proverb is generally associated with 
Benjamin Franklin, who wrote in a let-
ter dated November 13, 1789, “In this 
world nothing can be said to be certain, 
except death and taxes.”
nothing is certain but the unfore-
seen  The one thing that is sure to 
happen is the thing that nobody expects 
or is prepared for; also used to imply 
that nothing can be predicted: If it is true 
that nothing is certain but the unforeseen, 
then surely it is impossible to insure yourself 
against all eventualities. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1886, but with the 
implication that it was already in general 
use.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the unexpected always happens.
nothing is given so freely as advice  Peo-
ple are at their most generous when it 
comes to telling others what they should 
and should not do: When I asked for sugges-
tions about tackling the problem, my friends 
readily offered ideas and I discovered the truth 
of the saying “Nothing is given so freely as 
advice,” but when it came to getting practical 
or fi nancial assistance, the phrase “like pulling 
teeth” was more applicable.
nothing is impossible to a willing 
heart  Anything can be achieved by 
somebody with the will to succeed: He was 
one of those infuriating people who believe that 
there is no such word as “can’t,” and that noth-
ing is impossible to a willing heart. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in Stephen Hawes’s 
Passetyme of Pleasure (1509).
nothing comes of nothing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   206 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
207
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
where there’s a will there’s a way.
nothing should be done in haste but 
gripping a fl ea  There are very few 
things that need to be done quickly; said 
by somebody urged to hurry up: “Don’t 
be impatient,” she said, pouring herself another 
cup of coffee. “Nothing should be done in haste 
but gripping a fl ea.” The proverb dates 
from before 1655 in the form “Do noth-
ing rashly, but catching of fl eas.”
nothing so bad but it might have been 
worse  Try to take a positive view of 
misfortune—things are never as bad as 
they could be: I broke a leg, both arms, and 
several ribs, but at least I’m still alive—noth-
ing so bad but it might have been worse. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1876. A 
more pessimistic corollary is “Nothing so 
good but it might have been better.”
Variant of this proverb: from the day 
you were born till you ride in a hearse, 
there’s nothing so bad but it might have 
been worse.
nothing so bold as a blind mare  Those 
who are ignorant or unaware of danger 
proceed without fear or caution: Nothing so 
bold as a blind mare, and those who have the least 
understanding of how a plane fl ies usually have 
the fewest qualms about traveling by air. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1721 (James Kelly, Scottish Proverbs) but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin.
nothing succeeds like success  Success-
ful people go on to ever greater things; 
also used to imply that people are more 
respected or accepted after they succeed: 
“Nothing succeeds like success, and if 
Hitler had founded his empire . . . we 
can well imagine how later historians 
would have treated him” (Hugh Trevor-
Roper, History and Imagination, 1980). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in A. D. 
Richardson’s Beyond Mississippi (1867).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
success breeds success.
nothing ventured, nothing gained  You 
will not achieve anything unless you are 
prepared to make an attempt or take a 
risk: I knew that my suggestion would probably 
be greeted with ridicule, but this did not deter 
me—nothing ventured, nothing gained. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English c. 
1385, in Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde, in 
the form: “He which that nothing under-
taketh,/Nothyng n’acheveth.”
Variants of this proverb: nothing ven-
ture, nothing gain; nothing venture, noth-
ing have; nothing venture, nothing win.
nothing will come of nothing  See noth-
ing comes of nothing.
no tree takes so deep a root as preju-
dice  Once prejudice becomes estab-
lished—in a person’s mind or in society 
as a whole—it is very diffi cult to eradicate 
it: No tree takes so deep a root as prejudice, and 
neither education nor legislation can eliminate 
racial hatred that is handed down from genera-
tion to generation.
nought is never in danger  Persons or 
things of no value are at no risk of being 
stolen: He never bothered to lock the house 
behind him, as nought is never in danger. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 
in J. Clarke’s Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina.
nurture passes nature  The way in which 
a person is brought up counts for more 
 nurture passes nature
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   207 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
208
than any instinctive skills they may have 
been born with: It is a fundamental prin-
ciple of modern education that nurture passes 
nature. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1611 in Randle Cotgrave’s A Dictionary of 
the French and English Tongues.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: nature passes nurture.
nurture passes nature
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   208 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
ååå   å
209
obey orders, if you break owners  Do as 
you are commanded, even if this means 
doing something you know to be foolish 
or wrong: Provided that you follow the golden 
rule, “Obey orders, if you break owners,” nobody 
can hold you responsible for anything that 
goes wrong. Of nautical origin, the proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1823, 
but with the implication that it had long 
been in use.
the obvious choice is usually a quick 
regret  Think carefully before you make 
a selection or decision: Are you sure she is 
the best candidate for the job? Remember that 
the obvious choice is usually a quick regret.
offenders never pardon  Those who do 
wrong themselves are the least likely to 
forgive others’ wrongdoing: I was not 
surprised by his intolerant attitude, bearing 
in mind his own record—it’s well known that 
offenders never pardon. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in George Herbert’s Out-
landish Proverbs (1640).
of two evils choose the less  See choose 
the lesser of two evils.
oil and water do not mix  Some people 
or things are incompatible by nature: Put-
ting people with such different temperaments 
in the same team is a recipe for disaster—oil 
and water do not mix. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1783. It also occurs in 
the form of the simile like oil and water, 
applied to incompatible people or things.
Variant of this proverb: oil and vin-
egar will not mix.
an old dog will learn no tricks  See you 
can’t teach an old dog new tricks.
the older the wiser  The older a person 
gets, the wiser he or she becomes: She 
tried to put the affair behind her and rue-
fully told herself “the older the wiser.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in J. Clarke, 
Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina (1639).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: experience is the mother of wis-
dom; live and learn.
an old fool is the worst fool  See there’s 
no fool like an old fool.
an old fox is not easily snared  A person 
with years of experience is unlikely to 
be easily fooled: They tried to ambush him 
on the way home, but an old fox is not easily 
snared. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
R. Taverner, Proverbs or Adages with New 
Additions, gathered out of the Chiliades of 
Erasmus (1539).
o
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   209 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
210
Variant of this proverb: old foxes 
want no tutors.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
with age comes wisdom.
old friends and old wine are best 
Friendships that have stood the test of 
time are, like old wine, the best: “Old 
wine and an old friend are good provi-
sions.” (G. Herbert, Outlandish Proverbs, 
1640). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
T. Draxe, Bibliotheca Scholastica (1633).
Variant of this proverb: old friends 
and old wine and old gold are best.
old habits die hard  When you have 
been doing a particular thing—or doing 
something in a particular way—for a long 
time, it is very diffi cult to change: “Old 
habits die hard. Police offi cers who were 
trained to pump the brakes have been 
crashing a lot of police cars equipped with 
anti-lock brakes” (Washington Times, 1995). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1758 in 
the form “Habits are hard to break.”
old maids lead apes in hell Women 
who die unmarried are doomed to share 
the company of apes in the afterworld: 
“Get you to heaven, Beatrice, get you to 
heaven; here’s no place for you maids: 
so deliver I up my apes” (William Shake-
speare, Much Ado about Nothing, 2:1). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1575 in 
George Gascoigne’s Posies.
an old poacher makes the best game-
keeper  A reformed wrongdoer is good 
at preventing others from committing 
the same crime or offense, because he 
or she can understand their thinking 
and anticipate their actions: “What the 
Church needed, possibly, was a good 
leavening of sinners in its ministry, on 
the principle that poachers make the 
best gamekeepers” (Victor Canning, The 
Great Affair, 1970). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1878, but the 
sentiment it expresses occurs in Chau-
cer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “A theef 
of venysoun, that hath forlaft/His liker-
ousnesse and al his olde craft,/Kan kepe a 
forest best of any man.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
set a thief to catch a thief.
old sins cast long shadows  The pas-
sage of time often has the effect of making 
past wrongdoing seem greater or more 
signifi cant than it actually was: His sense of 
guilt increased as the years went by—old sins 
cast long shadows, as they say—and ultimately 
drove him to suicide. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1924, but the sentiment it 
ex presses is of earlier origin: in his play 
Aglaura (1638), Sir John Suckling wrote, 
“Our sins, like to our shadowes,/When 
our day is in its glorie scarce appear:/
To wards our evening how great and mon-
strous they are!”
Variant of this proverb: old sins have 
long shadows.
old soldiers never die  Those who have 
served in the armed forces and survived 
warfare often live so long that they seem 
indestructible: I saw Jack Stuart in the bar 
the other day, regaling some of the youngsters 
with his army stories. He must be well into 
his nineties by now—I guess it’s true that 
old soldiers never die. The proverb comes 
from a popular song of World War I: 
“Old soldiers never die,/They simply fade 
away.” A facetious variant is “Old soldiers 
never die—they just smell that way.” The 
proverb may be applied to other classes 
old friends and old wine are best
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   210 1/29/07   5:12:52 PM
211
of people or things by replacing the word 
soldiers. It has prompted numerous pun-
ning variants, such as “Old bankers never 
die, they just yield to maturity” and “Old 
insurance agents never die, it’s against 
their policy.”
old trees can’t be transplanted  See 
you can’t shift an old tree without 
it dying.
once a priest, always a priest  People 
cannot change their vocation; also used 
to imply that people continue to behave 
in accordance with the habits and train-
ing of their trade or profession even 
after they have left it: “You must be 
quite sure . . . that you have a voca-
tion because it would be terrible if you 
found afterwards that you had none. 
Once a priest always a priest, remember” 
(James Joyce, A Portrait of the Artist as a 
Young Man, 1916). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1859, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier ori-
gin. Other words may be substituted for 
priest when the proverb is used of other 
occupations.
once a thief, always a thief  Wrong-
doers cannot change their nature and can 
never be trusted: However tolerant and broad-
minded they may be in their private lives, many 
employers apply the principle “Once a thief, 
always a thief ” when it comes to considering job 
applications from people with criminal records. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1622 in 
the form “Once a knave and ever a knave.” 
Other words may be substituted for thief, 
such as crook, drunkard, fool, or whore, and 
the proverb is occasionally applied to those 
with enduring virtues rather than persistent 
vices, as in “Once a lady, always a lady.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the leopard can’t change its spots.
once bitten, twice shy  Somebody who 
has had a bad experience is reluctant to 
do the same thing again: She swore that she 
would never remarry—once bitten, twice shy. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1894.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: once burned, twice shy; a burnt 
child dreads the fire.
once burned, twice shy  People who 
have suffered as a result of a previous 
experience tend to be cautious in their 
approach to similar situations: “She was 
especially on her guard . . . because she’d 
been victimized in a stupid swindle her-
self, recently. Once burned, twice shy, 
you know” (Stewart Sterling, Dead Sure, 
1949). The quotation is the fi rst recorded 
use of the proverb in this form.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: once bitten, twice shy; a burnt 
child dreads the fire.
one bad apple spoils the lot  See the 
rotten apple spoils the barrel.
one business begets another When one 
business prospers, other businesses are 
likely to start up: Within weeks the high 
street was full of shops selling fast food, but 
as they say, one business begets another. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1528 in 
Thomas More’s Works: “It is an olde said 
saw, that one busynes begetteth and bryn-
geth forth another.”
one cannot be in two places at once 
Nobody can deal with two different 
things or attend two different events in 
 one cannot be in two places at once
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   211 1/29/07   5:12:53 PM
212
two different places at the same time; 
said when confl icting demands are made 
on somebody, or when a choice has to 
be made between confl icting options: 
I would love to go to the show, but I don’t 
want to miss my evening class, and one cannot 
be in two places at once. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1611, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t be 
in two places at the same time.
one cannot love and be wise  People 
often show a lack of common sense or 
good judgment when they are in love: 
“To tax and to please, no more than to 
love and to be wise, is not given to men” 
(Edmund Burke, On American Taxation, 
1775). The proverb has been traced back 
to the writings of Publilius Syrus (fi rst 
century b.c.): “amare et saper vix deo con-
ceditur [to love and to be wise is scarcely 
allowed to God].”
one courageous thought will put to fl ight 
a host of troubles  A strong and positive 
mental attitude is the best defense against 
anxiety or adversity: Keep your spirits up, 
and remember that one courageous thought will 
put to fl ight a host of troubles.
one enemy is too much  Having even 
a single enemy in the world is danger-
ous: “One enemy is too much for a man 
in a great post, and a hundred friends 
are too few” (H.G. Bohn, A Hand-Book 
of Proverbs, 1855). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1640 in George Herbert’s 
Outlandish Proverbs.
one for sorrow; two for mirth; three for 
a wedding; four for a birth  According 
to popular superstition, the number of 
magpies seen on a particular occasion 
portends sadness, happiness, and so on: 
A magpie landed on the fence and I anxiously 
looked around for its mate, the old rhyme “One 
for sorrow, two for mirth” running through my 
mind. The proverb comes from a tradi-
tional rhyme, fi rst recorded in the nine-
teenth century, that continues: “fi ve for 
silver; six for gold; seven for a secret not 
to be told; eight for heaven; nine for hell; 
and ten for the devil’s own sel [self].”
Variant of this proverb: one for sor-
row, two for joy, three for a girl, and four 
for a boy.
one for the mouse, one for the crow, one 
to rot, one to grow  It is advisable not 
to expect a yield of more than 25 percent 
when sowing seed: Don’t sow the seed too 
thinly if you want a good crop—remember the 
old saying “One for the mouse, one for the crow, 
one to rot, and one to grow.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1850.
Variant of this proverb: one for wind 
and one for crow, one to die and one to 
grow.
one funeral makes many  Standing 
around a grave on a cold or rainy day is 
not good for the health, and can prove fatal 
for those attending a funeral: “It has been 
said . . . that one funeral makes many. A 
strong east wind . . . whistled through the 
crowd of mourners” (R. D. Blackmore, 
Perlycross, 1894). The quotation is the fi rst 
recorded use of the proverb.
one good turn deserves another  Acts of 
kindness or assistance should be recipro-
cated; often said when returning a favor: 
“But one good turn deserves another—in 
that case, you must . . . dine with me” (Sir 
one cannot love and be wise
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   212 1/29/07   5:12:53 PM
213
Walter Scott, St. Ronan’s Well, 1824). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English at 
the beginning of the 15th century, but a 
French equivalent was in use in the early 
14th century.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you scratch my back and i’ll scratch 
yours.
one half of the world doesn’t know how 
the other half lives  People have no 
conception or understanding of the prob-
lems and pleasures of everyday life for 
those in other social classes, occupations, 
or countries; chiefl y used of the contrast 
between rich and poor: The famous remark 
“Let them eat cake,” allegedly made by Marie 
Antoinette on learning that her people had 
no bread, is a classic illustration of the saying 
“One half of the world doesn’t know how the 
other half lives.” First recorded in Eng-
lish in 1607, the proverb occurs in the 
French satirist François Rabelais’s novel 
Pantagruel (1532): “la moytié du monde ne 
sçait comment l’autre vit.” It has given rise 
to the fi gurative phrase how the other half 
lives, referring to a lifestyle very different 
from your own.
Variant of this proverb: half the world 
knows not how the other half lives.
one hand for yourself and one for the 
ship  Do not neglect your own safety, 
security, or well-being for the sake of 
your work or your employers; also used 
literally as a safety maxim for those 
working at sea: He gave the company every-
thing he had for most of his working life, and 
what good did it do him? I’m determined 
not to follow in his footsteps—my motto is 
“One hand for yourself and one for the ship.” 
Of nautical origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1799.
one hand washes the other  People 
cooperate and help one another, and 
expect favors to be reciprocated: We 
were not surprised to learn that the main-
tenance contract for the party headquarters 
had been won by our rivals, who made such a 
generous contribution to the party’s last elec-
tion campaign—one hand washes the other. 
First recorded in English in 1573, the 
proverb is of ancient origin, occurring 
in the works of the Greek poet Epichar-
mus (c. 540–450 b.c.).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you scratch my back and i’ll scratch 
yours.
one hour’s sleep before midnight is 
worth two after  Those who go to bed 
early have a more refreshing night’s sleep 
than those who rise late in the morning: I 
was well aware of the saying “One hour’s sleep 
before midnight is worth two after,” but in my 
fi rst year at college I never actually managed 
to put it to the test. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1640 in George Herbert’s 
Outlandish Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: one hour’s 
sleep before midnight is worth three 
after.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
early to bed and early to rise, makes a 
man healthy, wealthy, and wise.
one law for the rich and another for 
the poor  It sometimes seems that 
rich people are treated more leniently 
by the legal system than poor people: 
“Now, if the husbands and fathers of 
these ladies,—those who have them-
selves enacted the laws,—wink at their 
infringement, why should not others do 
so? . . . There cannot be one law for the 
rich and another for the poor” (Captain 
 one law for the rich and another for the poor
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   213 1/29/07   5:12:53 PM
214
Marryat, The King’s Own, 1830). The 
quotation is the fi rst recorded use of the 
proverb.
Variant of this proverb: there’s one 
law for the rich and another for the poor.
one lie leads to another  Once you 
have told one lie, it is often necessary to 
continue lying to maintain the deception: 
I had previously told them I wasn’t married, so 
when my wife arrived I had to introduce her as 
my sister—one lie leads to another. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1534.
Variants of this proverb: one lie 
begets another; one lie makes many; one 
seldom meets a lonely lie.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what a tangled web we weave when 
first we practice to deceive.
one man’s loss is another man’s 
gain  People profi t from the misfor-
tunes of others; also used more literally: 
One man’s loss is another man’s gain, and our 
takings doubled when the bar next door closed 
down. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1527 in the form “What one wins, 
another loses.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any 
good.
one man’s meat is another man’s poison 
What one person likes, another person 
dislikes: The show had good reviews in the 
national press, but one man’s meat is another 
man’s poison, and I didn’t enjoy it at all. First 
recorded in English c. 1576, the prov-
erb is of ancient origin: in his De Rerum 
Natura (fi rst century b.c.), the Roman 
poet Lucretius wrote, “quod ali cibus est 
aliis fuat acre venenum [what is food to one 
person may be bitter poison to others].”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every man to his taste; tastes 
differ; there’s no accounting for 
tastes.
one man’s trash is another man’s trea-
sure  Many people prize things that oth-
ers would not give houseroom to: Nobody 
who has ever been to a yard sale or fl ea market 
can dispute the truth of the saying “One man’s 
trash is another man’s treasure.”
one might as well be hanged for a sheep 
as for a lamb  If you are going to suffer 
or be punished for something, you might as 
well get the maximum pleasure or benefi t 
from it: When the cakes arrived, she decided 
to ignore her diet and helped herself to a large 
cream puff, probably the most fattening item on 
the plate. “One might as well be hanged for a 
sheep as for a lamb,” she said with a guilty smile. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1678.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
in for a penny, in for a pound.
one nail drives out another  One thing 
replaces another, or new ideas or customs 
cause old ones to fall into disuse: “As one 
nail by strength drives out another,/So 
the remembrance of my former love/Is by 
a newer object quite forgotten” (William 
Shakespeare, The Two Gentlemen of Verona, 
1591). The proverb is of ancient origin, 
and was known to the Greek philosopher 
Aristotle in the fourth century b.c.
one of these days is none of these 
days  Somebody who says he or she will 
do something “one of these days”—that 
is, at some unspecifi ed future time—will 
probably never do it; said in response to 
such a person: “One of these days I must go 
through my wardrobe and get rid of all the 
one lie leads to another
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   214 1/29/07   5:12:53 PM
215
clothes I never wear.” “One of these days is 
none of these days. If you don’t get on and do 
it you’ll have to buy a new wardrobe!” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in Comes Fac-
undus (1658).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
tomorrow never comes.
one picture is worth ten thousand 
words  Visual images are often the most 
concise and effective means of expres-
sion: They say that one picture is worth ten 
thousand words, and if you ask somebody to 
name a memorable news story from the past, 
the chances are that he or she will describe the 
photograph that accompanied it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1927 by Frederick 
R. Barnard in Printers’ Ink.
Variant of this proverb: a picture is 
worth a thousand words.
one seldom meets a lonely lie  See one 
lie leads to another.
one step at a time  Do not rush at things 
or try to do too much at once—if you 
proceed slowly and carefully, things will 
seem less daunting and you will be less 
likely to make mistakes: “I did not allow 
myself to think of ultimate escape. . . . 
One step at a time was enough” (John 
Buchan, Mr. Standfast, 1919). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in C. M. Yonge’s Heir of 
Redclyffe (1853).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
life is hard by the yard, but by the 
inch life’s a cinch.
one story is good till another is 
told  People are happy to accept one idea 
until a new idea comes along to replace it: 
“A theory is not proved . . . because the 
evidence in its favour looks well at fi rst 
sight. . . . ‘One story is good till another 
is told!’” (Thomas Babington Macaulay, in 
the Edinburgh Review, 1831). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1593 in the form 
“One tale is always good until another is 
heard.”
one swallow does not make a summer 
You cannot generalize from a single 
occurrence: One swallow does not make a 
summer, and the fact that she won the fi rst race 
of the season does not prove that she is worthy 
of selection for the Olympic team. The prov-
erb is of ancient Greek and Latin origin 
in the form “One swallow does not make 
a spring.”
Variant of this proverb: one swallow 
makes not a spring, nor one woodchuck 
a winter.
one sword keeps another in its scab-
bard  Showing that you are ready and 
able to defend yourself is a good way of 
discouraging others from attacking you: 
“The proverb ‘One sword drawn keeps 
the other in the scabbard’ was verifi ed, the 
hostile preparations led to negociations, 
and the question was settled without fi ght-
ing” (Frederick Chamier, Ben Brace, 1836). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1640. 
The nuclear deterrent is a modern illustra-
tion of the sentiment it expresses.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if you want peace, prepare for war.
one thief robs another People who are 
dishonest will not scruple to steal from 
each other. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1510 in A. Barclay’s Eclogues in the 
form: “It is ill stealing from a thiefe.”
one volunteer is worth two pressed 
men  Those who volunteer for work or 
 one volunteer is worth two pressed men
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   215 1/29/07   5:12:53 PM
216
service are generally more effi cient and 
reliable than those who are forced to do 
it against their will: We never turn away 
anybody who offers to help, on the principle 
that one volunteer is worth two pressed men. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1705 in 
T. Hearne’s Journal.
Variant of this proverb: a volunteer is 
worth ten pressed men.
one wedding brings another  The 
romantic atmosphere of a wedding may 
have an effect on unmarried guests, 
prompting other couples to get engaged 
or sparking off new relationships that 
will lead to the altar: My son was a bit 
nervous when his new girlfriend invited him 
to her sister’s wedding—one wedding brings 
another, and he doesn’t want it to be his! The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1634, but 
with the implication that it was already in 
general use.
one year’s seeding makes seven years’ 
weeding  If you allow weeds to seed 
themselves, it will take a long time to get 
rid of all the new plants they produce; 
also used fi guratively of the need to eradi-
cate something undesirable before it has a 
chance to spread, or to warn people that 
their actions can have lasting repercus-
sions: Weeds are not only unsightly, but also a 
potential source of trouble for the future—one 
year’s seeding makes seven years’ weeding. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1866 in the 
form “One year’s seeding may cost ten 
years’ weeding.”
the only difference between stumbling 
blocks and stepping-stones is the way 
you use them  Be positive in your 
approach to obstacles that lie in your 
path, and try to turn them to your advan-
tage: I fi rmly believe that the only difference 
between stumbling blocks and stepping-stones 
is the way you use them, and although my fi rst 
few job applications were unsuccessful, they 
gave me the opportunity to hone my skills as 
an interviewee. This proverb is recorded 
as a regional expression in the United 
States.
the only place where success comes 
before work is in a dictionary  Nobody 
succeeds without fi rst making an effort: 
Remember that the only place where success 
comes before work is in a dictionary, and if you 
want to make a go of this business you need to 
focus all your time and attention on it.
the only thing a heated argument 
ever produced is coolness  An angry 
exchange of words resolves nothing and 
leads to a breakdown of friendly relations: 
If you sit down and discuss your differences 
calmly and rationally, you may ultimately 
reach agreement, but the only thing a heated 
argument ever produced is coolness. This prov-
erb is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
Variant of this proverb: heated argu-
ments do not warm the fi reside.
the only thing we have to fear is fear 
itself  Negative feelings such as fear and 
doubt can do more harm than the things 
you are afraid of or uncertain about: Once 
we have grasped the notion that the only thing 
we have to fear is fear itself, we can face the 
future with renewed courage, confi dence, and 
optimism. The proverb is associated with 
President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who 
used it in his fi rst inaugural address in 
1933, but it is probably of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: we have 
nothing to fear but fear itself.
one wedding brings another
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   216 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
217
only time will tell  See time will tell.
open confession is good for the soul 
See confession is good for the soul.
an open door may tempt a saint  It is 
best not to put temptation in anybody’s 
way—even the most honest and upright 
person might fi nd it hard to resist: She 
had never stolen a cent in her life before, but 
the sight of all that money lying there was 
too much for her—an open door may tempt 
a saint. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1659 in James Howell’s Spanish Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opportunity makes a thief.
the opera ain’t over till the fat lady 
sings  Wait until something fi nally 
comes to an end before you give up 
hope, celebrate your success, abandon 
your efforts, or make a judgment: “One 
day three years ago, Ralph Carpenter, 
who was then Texas Tech’s sports infor-
mation director, declared to the press 
box contingent in Austin, ‘The rodeo 
ain’t over till the bull riders ride.’ Stirred 
to top that deep insight, San Antonio 
sports editor Dan Cook countered with, 
‘The opera ain’t over till the fat lady 
sings’” (Washington Post, 1978). Current 
from at least the 1970s, the proverb has 
a possible origin in the southern U.S. 
saying, “Church ain’t out till the fat lady 
sings.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
it’s not over till it’s over.
opportunities look for you when you are 
worth fi nding  Those who have good 
fortune are often those who best deserve 
it: Don’t just sit around complaining that you 
never get the breaks—people succeed on their 
own merits, not by luck, and opportunities look 
for you when you are worth fi nding. The prov-
erb is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opportunity never knocks for persons 
not worth a rap.
opportunity knocks but once  Take 
advantage of opportunities when they 
arise, because you may not get a second 
chance: “‘Opportunity only knocks once 
in this world,’ he would say. Major Major’s 
father repeated this good joke at every 
opportunity” (Joseph Heller, Catch-22, 
1961). The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in 1567. Early 
examples of its use had fortune or fate in 
place of opportunity.
Variant of this proverb: opportunity 
never knocks twice at any man’s door.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that will not when he may, when 
he will he may have nay.
opportunity makes a thief  Do not leave 
valuable things unsecured in a place where 
they could easily be stolen: Opportunity 
makes a thief, and people who park their car 
on the street and leave the keys in the ignition 
should not be too surprised to fi nd it gone when 
they return. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in this form in 1387, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the hole calls the thief; an open 
door may tempt a saint.
opportunity never knocks for persons 
not worth a rap  Worthless people are 
unlikely to enjoy good fortune: She could 
have made something of herself if she had tried, 
but she was too idle and feckless to bother, and 
 opportunity never knocks for persons not worth a rap
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   217 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
218
opportunity never knocks for persons not worth 
a rap.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
opportunities look for you when you 
are worth finding.
opportunity never knocks twice at any 
man’s door  See opportunity knocks 
but once.
opposites attract  People who have 
nothing in common are often drawn 
together because they have qualities that 
complement each other: They say that 
opposites attract, but a lasting friendship is 
more likely to be built on similarity than on 
difference. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1918 in J. Watson and A. J. Rees’s Mys-
tery of the Downs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
extremes meet.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: like attracts like.
the optimist’s cup is half full; the pessi-
mist’s cup is half empty  See the glass is 
either half empty or half full.
other times, other manners  Customs 
and conventions change over the years, 
and we should not judge people or things 
of the past by modern standards, or vice 
versa; sometimes said to those who mock 
or criticize the behavior of members of 
a different generation: “Notwithstanding 
the favourite explanation of ‘other times, 
other manners,’ contemporary critics of 
Clarissa found very much the same fault 
with her history as people do to-day” 
(Austin Dobson, Samuel Richardson, 1902). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in 1576, in the form “Other times, other 
ways,” but the sentiment it expresses is of 
ancient origin. It also occurs in the French 
form “Autres temps, autres moeurs.”
Variant of this proverb: other times, 
other customs.
an ounce of common sense is worth a 
pound of theory  A practical common-
sense approach is often far more effective 
than abstract theorizing: Ms. Jackson and 
her helpers believe that an ounce of common 
sense is worth a pound of theory, and have 
worked wonders with some of the problem cases 
that the so-called experts gave up on long ago.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never let your education interfere 
with your intelligence.
an ounce of discretion is worth a pound 
of wit  Good judgment is often more 
valuable than knowledge or learning; also 
interpreted more literally as a warning 
to tactfully refrain from making jokes at 
another’s expense: At times like this it is 
wise to err on the side of caution, whatever 
the textbooks say—remember that an ounce of 
discretion is worth a pound of wit. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1616 (T. Adams, 
Sacrifi ce of Thankfulness), with learning in 
place of wit.
an ounce of practice is worth a pound 
of precept  The best way to teach is 
by example, and the best way to learn 
is by experience: “Remember that rigid 
probity, and the strictest punctuality . . . 
are the very soul of business, and that 
an ounce of practice is worth a pound 
of precept” (R. D. Blackmore, Cradock 
Nowell, 1866).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: experience is the best teacher; an 
ounce of practice is worth a pound of 
precept; years know more than books.
opportunity never knocks twice at any man’s door
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   218 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
219
an ounce of prevention is worth a 
pound of cure  It often takes a lot of 
effort to put right something that could 
have been prevented with a little effort: 
“An ounce of prevention is worth a 
pound of cure. . . . All the old saws point 
up the value of heading off a problem 
before it reaches the pass” (Washington 
Times, 1997).
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
a stitch in time saves nine; prevention is 
better than cure; who repairs not his 
gutters repairs his whole house.
out of debt, out of danger  Nobody 
who owes money can feel safe and secure: 
I breathed a sigh of relief as I handed over the 
wad of bills—out of debt, out of danger. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a man in debt is caught in a net.
out of sight, out of mind  We tend to 
forget about people or things we have 
not seen for some time: “He did not 
actually suggest that she should come 
home. Evidently it was still necessary 
that she should remain out of sight and 
out of mind—a skeleton in a distant and 
well-locked cupboard” (George Orwell, A 
Clergyman’s Daughter, 1935). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1450, but the senti-
ment it expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
seldom seen, soon forgotten.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
absence makes the heart grow fonder.
out of the fullness of the heart the 
mouth speaks  People cannot avoid talk-
ing about what is on their mind; also used 
to imply that a person’s true thoughts and 
feelings are revealed by what he or she 
says: Out of the fullness of the heart the mouth 
speaks, and she was so angry and upset that 
she could restrain herself no longer. The prov-
erb is of biblical origin: “O generation 
of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak 
good things? for out of the abundance of 
the heart the mouth speaketh” (Matthew 
12:34).
Variant of this proverb: out of 
the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaks.
out of the mouths of babes and suck-
lings come great truths  Children often 
make surprisingly pertinent remarks or 
profound observations by accident: I asked 
Megan if she knew what divorce was, and she 
said, “It’s when your dad doesn’t live with you 
any more but buys you better birthday presents.” 
Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings! 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Out of 
the mouth of babes and sucklings hath 
thou ordained strength” (Psalm 8:2), “Yea; 
have ye never read, Out of the mouth of 
babes and sucklings thou hast perfected 
praise?” (Matthew 21:16). It is often used 
in a shortened and allusive form, as in the 
example.
Variant of this proverb: from the 
mouths of babes come words of wisdom.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
children and fools speak the truth.
 out of the mouths of babes and sucklings come great truths
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   219 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
ååå   å
220
paddle your own canoe  Make your own 
way; rely upon your own resources: He 
decided to go freelance and paddle his own 
canoe. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1844, in Captain Frederick Marryat’s Set-
tlers in Canada, but became better known 
through a poem by Sarah Bolton, pub-
lished in Harper’s Magazine in May 1854: 
“Voyage upon life’s sea,/To yourself be 
true,/And, whatever your lot may be,/
Paddle your own canoe.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every man is the architect of his 
own fortune; if you want a thing 
done well, do it yourself; god helps 
those who help themselves; life is 
what you make it.
paper bleeds little  It is easy to do some-
thing in writing, without taking account of 
the human factors involved: The conditions 
seemed reasonable and harmless enough on 
paper, but paper bleeds little, and nobody could 
have predicted how much suffering they would 
cause. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1940, in Ernest Hemingway’s novel For 
Whom the Bell Tolls, but with the implica-
tion that it was already in general use.
paper does not blush  It is possible to 
express in writing what you would be too 
ashamed or embarrassed to say: I can’t 
tell him face to face—I’ll send him a letter. 
Paper does not blush. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1577 in John Grange’s The 
Golden Aphroditis.
parents are patterns  Parents are role 
models for their children and should set a 
good example: Parents are patterns, and with 
their father in prison and their mother funding 
her drug habit with prostitution, these children 
have little chance of remaining on the straight 
and narrow. This proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
parsley seed goes nine times to the 
devil  Parsley is a diffi cult plant to grow, 
and the seeds take such a long time to 
germinate that it seems they have been 
down to hell several times before they 
sprout: They say that parsley seed goes nine 
times to the devil, and in my experience some 
of it never comes back—I sowed a whole packet 
in that bed, and all I got was a few scrawny 
plants. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1658, but with the implication that it was 
already in regional use in England.
past cure, past care  It is futile worry-
ing about something when it is too late 
to do anything about it. The proverb was 
recorded in the works of Robert Greene 
in 1593: “Remember the old proverbe, 
p
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   220 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
221
past cure, past care.” In 1594 William 
Shakespeare quoted the proverb in his 
play Love’s Labour’s Lost (5:2): “Great rea-
son; for ‘past cure is still past care.’”
the path of true love never runs 
smooth  See the course of true love 
never did run smooth.
patience is a remedy for every sor-
row  In time grief will fade, ills will be 
cured, and problems will be solved, so 
all you can do is wait patiently: Patience is 
a remedy for every sorrow, and in six months’ 
time you’ll probably have forgotten all about 
it. The proverb was fi rst recorded, with 
different wording, c. 1390. In modern 
usage the word sorrow may be replaced by 
disease or trouble.
Variant of this proverb: patience is a 
plaster for all sores.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
time is a great healer.
patience is a virtue  It is good to be 
patient, but it is not easy: “patience is a 
virtue; and . . . you ought not to be in 
haste to take a fi rst offer, for fear you 
should not have a second” (Samuel Rich-
ardson, Sir Charles Grandison, 1754). First 
recorded in English in the 14th century, 
the proverb is of ancient origin.
Variants of this proverb: patience is 
a virtue, catch it if you can: seldom in a 
woman and never in a man; patience is a 
virtue which few possess—some have a 
little, others have less.
patriotism is the last refuge of a scoun-
drel  Those who have no better argument 
resort to appeals to patriotic sentiment: 
The meeting split into those who believed it was 
right to fi ght to defend national interests and 
those who believed that such patriotism was the 
last refuge of scoundrels. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded as a quotation of Samuel Johnson 
in James Boswell’s Life of Johnson (1791).
pay as you go and nothing you’ll owe  It 
is best to pay for everything when you 
receive it and not to get into debt: In these 
days of credit cards and charge accounts, the 
saying “Pay as you go and nothing you’ll owe” 
has a rather old-fashioned ring. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1851 Polly Peablos-
som’s Wedding (T. A. Burke, ed.).
pay beforehand was never well 
served  People who are paid in advance 
for their services have little incentive to 
work hard or well: Take my advice and don’t 
hand over any money until the job is at least 
half done—pay beforehand was never well 
served. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1591 in the form “He that pays aforehand 
has never his work well done.”
pay what you owe and you’ll know what 
you own  Once you have paid in full for 
something, there can be no dispute about 
who owns it; also used with reference to 
the seizure of a debtor’s property: “Pay 
what you owe and you’ll know what you own,” 
they say, so I guess the house and car aren’t 
mine yet. The proverb is fi rst recorded 
in J. Stevens’s A New Spanish and English 
Dictionary (1706).
peace makes plenty  Peace brings 
prosperity: “Peace, Dear nurse of arts, 
plenties, and joyful births” (William 
Shakespeare, Henry V, 5:2). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in Reliquae Antiquae in 
the 15th century.
Variants of this proverb: peace 
maketh plenty; plenty maketh pride; 
 peace makes plenty
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   221 1/29/07   5:12:54 PM
222
pride maketh war; war maketh poverty; 
poverty maketh peace.
the pen is mightier than the sword 
Writing can be more effective or per-
suasive than violence or aggression; also 
used to imply that words can be more 
dangerous than weapons: “Beneath the 
rule of men entirely great/The pen 
is mightier than the sword” (Edward 
George Bulwer-Lytton, Richelieu, 1838). 
The quotation is the fi rst recorded use 
of the proverb in its current form, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a goose quill is more dangerous than 
a lion’s claw.
a penny saved is a penny earned  It is 
wise to save money whenever you can, 
however small the amount: This brand is 
not much cheaper, but a penny saved is a penny 
earned. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1640 in the form “A penny spar’d is twice 
got,” and the word got was used in place 
of earned in subsequent occurrences of the 
proverb up to the early 20th century.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: saving is getting; thrift is a great 
revenue.
penny wise and pound foolish  By being 
too thrifty or frugal with small expenses 
you may incur a much larger expense; 
also used of those who combine parsi-
mony with extravagance: “The problem in 
any police agency is that training assumes 
lower priority than putting people out on 
the street. In a lot of ways that’s penny 
wise and pound foolish” (New York Times, 
1987). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1607, in Edward Topsell’s History of 
Four-footed Beasts: “If by couetousnesse 
or negligence, one withdraw from them 
their ordinary foode, he shall be penny 
wise, and pound foolish.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
spare at the spigot, and let out the 
bunghole.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: take care of the pence and the 
pounds will take care of themselves.
people are more easily led than driven 
It is better to guide people by example 
than to force them to do as they are told: 
You may fi nd that a change of approach will 
work wonders—people are more easily led than 
driven, and nobody responds well to threats and 
coercion. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1690 in Winthrop Papers.
people who live in glass houses shouldn’t 
throw stones  Do not criticize others 
if you have the same faults yourself and 
are therefore vulnerable to retaliation: 
“Granted, the present internal chaos and 
confusion of the Anglican churches in the 
Northern hemisphere forbids me to make 
merry at Rome’s expense; people who live 
in glass houses should not throw stones; yet 
there is a difference here. The trouble with 
Western Anglicanism is that it has drifted 
from its Reformation roots in matters of 
mental method, and needs to return to 
those roots” (James I. Packer, “Assessing 
the Anglican-Roman Catholic Divide: An 
Anglican Perspective,” CRUX, 1997). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1640, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin: 
Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde (c. 1385) 
contains a similar warning for “Who that 
hath an hed of verre [a head of glass].” A 
facetious variant is “People who live in glass 
houses should undress in the dark.”
the pen is mightier than the sword
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   222 1/29/07   5:12:55 PM
223
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
judge not, that ye be not judged.
physician, heal thyself  Do not reproach 
another person for something that you 
are equally guilty of; also used to imply 
that you should solve your own problems 
before you try to deal with those of 
other people: “How can a man . . . teach 
sobriety or cleanliness, if he be himself 
drunken or foul? ‘Physician, heal thyself,’ 
is the answer of his neighbours” (Samuel 
Smiles, Thrift, 1875). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Ye will surely say unto 
me this proverb, Physician, heal thy-
self: whatsoever we have heard done in 
Capernaum, do also here in thy country” 
(Luke 4:23).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
sweep your own doorstep clean.
a picture is worth a thousand words  See 
one picture is worth ten thousand 
words.
pigs are pigs  All bad people or things 
are equally undesirable, regardless of 
where they come from: Pigs are pigs, and 
this kind of behavior is no more acceptable in a 
college graduate than it is in an ignorant lout. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1822, 
in a letter from Charles Lamb to Samuel 
Taylor Coleridge.
pigs may fl y, but they are very unlikely 
birds  See if a pig had wings, it might 
fly.
piss or get off the pot  If you’re not 
ready to take action or get on with what 
you have to do, then make way for some-
body who is: This is not the time for hesita-
tion or indecision—piss or get off the pot!
Variant of this proverb: shit or get 
off the pot.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
fish or cut bait.
the pitcher will go to the well once 
too often  Nothing can continue or be 
repeated indefi nitely—a run of good for-
tune or success must come to an end, per-
sistent cheats or swindlers will ultimately 
be caught out: I decided not to push my 
luck by asking for yet another extension to the 
deadline—my publisher had accepted all the 
excuses I’d given so far, but the pitcher will go 
to the well once too often. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1340.
Variant of this proverb: a pitcher 
that goes to the well too often is broken 
at last.
pity is akin to love  Pity and love are 
related emotions: She pitied him, and 
although pity is akin to love, it is not the best 
foundation for a lasting relationship. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1696, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin, occurring in Shakespeare’s play 
Twelfth Night (3:1): “I pity you.—That’s a 
degree to love.”
a place for everything and everything 
in its place  Everything belongs some-
where, and should be tidied away; often 
used to encourage orderliness or to describe 
an orderly place: “‘I thought you were 
rather partial to anatomical specimens.’ ‘So I 
am, but not on the breakfast-table.’ ‘A place 
for everything and everything in its place,’ 
as my grandmother used to say.” (Dorothy 
L. Sayers, Lord Peter Views Body, 1928). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1640, with 
different wording, and occurs in guides 
to thrift and household  management, 
 a place for everything and everything in its place
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   223 1/29/07   5:12:55 PM
224
 notably that written by Mrs. Isabella Bee-
ton (1836–65).
please your eye and plague your 
heart  Those who choose their husbands, 
wives, or lovers on the basis of good looks 
alone may suffer for their choice: “‘Please 
your eye and plague your heart’ is an 
adage that want of beauty invented, I dare 
say, more than a thousand years ago” (Wil-
liam Cobbett, Advice to Young Men, 1829). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1617.
pleasure fi rst and business after  See 
business before pleasure.
plus ça change, plus c’est la même 
chose  See the more things change, 
the more they stay the same.
poets are born, not made  The ability to 
write poetry is an innate quality and cannot 
be taught or learned: She rejected the notion 
that poets are born, not made, and believed that 
everybody was capable of putting his or her 
thoughts into verse, with or without tuition. 
The proverb is of ancient origin in its Latin 
form, “Poeta nascitur, non fi t.” It is sometimes 
applied to different skills or occupations by 
substituting another word for poets, as in 
“Salesmen are born, not made.”
politeness costs nothing and gains every-
thing  See civility costs nothing.
politics makes strange bedfellows  Pol-
itics tends to bring together those who 
would normally avoid each other’s com-
pany, and unlikely alliances may be forged 
for political reasons: “For, if anything, 
Troy represented the earthy patriotism of 
New York’s hard-hat voters, a fact which, 
according to Mankiewicz, ‘made him a 
special hero to us.’ Politics do indeed 
make strange bedfellows” (Victor Lasky, 
It Didn’t Start with Watergate, 1977). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1839 in 
Diary of Philip Hone. The expression strange 
bedfellows derives from Shakespeare’s Tem-
pest (2:2; 1611): “Misery acquaints a man 
with strange bedfellows.”
a poor excuse is better than none  See a 
bad excuse is better than none.
possession is nine points of the law  A 
person who actually has something in his 
or her possession is in a strong position 
for claiming legal ownership of or entitle-
ment to it: “It is hard to reconcile this 
with Russia’s dreadful example of looting 
masses of art, hiding it and then claiming 
that possession is 90 percent of the law” 
(New York Times, 1994). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1616 (T. Draxe, Adages). 
The nine in the proverb is nine out of ten 
parts. The “nine points” have been listed as 
(1) a good deal of money, (2) a good deal 
of patience, (3) a good case, (4) a good 
lawyer, (5) a good counsel, (6) good wit-
nesses, (7) a good jury, (8) a good judge, 
and (9) good luck.
Variant of this proverb: possession is 
nine-tenths of the law.
a postern door makes a thief  It is all too 
easy to rob a house that has a rear entrance 
through which people can slip in and out 
unnoticed: They had fi tted extra locks and bolts 
on the back door, on the basis of the saying “A pos-
tern door makes a thief,” but unfortunately they 
had neglected to secure the windows. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded c. 1450 in the form 
“A back door makes a rich man poor.”
Variant of this proverb: the back 
door robs the house.
please your eye and plague your heart
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   224 1/29/07   5:12:55 PM
225
the post of honor is the post of danger 
The most perilous positions in an admin-
istration or organization are those that 
have the highest prestige: She had no ambi-
tions to rise any further through the ranks, on 
the basis that the post of honor is the post of 
danger. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1832 in A. Henderson’s Scot-
tish Proverbs but the sentiment it expresses 
is of much earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the highest branch is not the saf-
est roost; uneasy lies the head that 
wears a crown.
the pot calls the kettle black  People 
criticize others for faults that they have 
themselves, or make accusations that are 
equally applicable to themselves: “But a very 
few weeks after Voltaire’s arrival, little clouds 
of discord become visible on the horizon; 
and one can overhear the pot and the kettle . 
. . calling each other black” (Lytton Strachey, 
Biographical Essays, “Voltaire and Frederick 
the Great,” 1949). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1699, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin. 
It alludes to the blackened bottoms of pots, 
pans, and kettles used on an open fi re.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: the best place for criticism is in 
front of your mirror.
poverty comes from God, but not 
dirt  Some people cannot avoid being 
poor, but nobody has any excuse for being 
dirty or for failing to keep his or her 
house clean: “Poverty comes from God, but not 
dirt,” my aunt used to say as she scrubbed the 
fl oor on her hands and knees.
poverty is no crime  See poverty is not 
a crime.
poverty is no disgrace, but it’s a great 
inconvenience  Poor people have noth-
ing to be ashamed of, but their situation 
is nonetheless undesirable: “‘Poverty’s no 
disgrace, but ’tis a great inconvenience’ 
was a common saying among the Lark Rise 
people; but . . . their poverty was no less 
than a hampering drag upon them” (Flora 
Thompson, Lark Rise to Candleford, 1945). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1591 in 
the form “Poverty is no vice, though it be 
an inconvenience.”
poverty is not a crime  Poor people 
should not be treated like criminals: “It 
is easy enough to say that poverty is no 
crime. No; if it were men wouldn’t be 
ashamed of it” (Jerome K. Jerome, Idle 
Thoughts of an Idle Fellow, 1889). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1591 in the form 
“Poverty is no vice.”
Variants of this proverb: poverty is 
no crime; poverty is no sin.
poverty makes strange bedfellows  See 
adversity makes strange bedfellows.
power corrupts, and absolute power cor-
rupts absolutely  Power has an adverse 
effect on the integrity of those in authority, 
and the more power they have, the worse 
they become: His impeccable record suggested 
that he would be a just and wise ruler, but power 
corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely, 
and the people lived to regret their choice. The 
proverb comes from a letter written by 
the En glish historian Lord Acton in 1887: 
“Power tends to corrupt, and absolute 
power corrupts absolutely. Great men are 
almost always bad men, even when they 
exercise infl uence and not authority.” The 
sentiment expressed in the shorter form, 
“Power corrupts,” is of earlier origin.
 power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   225 1/29/07   5:12:55 PM
226
practice makes perfect  The more often 
you do something, the better at it you 
become: “Young birds very frequently make 
their fi rst fl ight when their parents are out 
of sight. Practice of course makes perfect 
and puts a polish on the somewhat awkward 
fi rst performance; but there is no elaborate 
learning needed” (J. S. Huxley, Man in the 
Modern World, “The Intelligence of Birds,” 
1947). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1553 in T. Wilson’s Art of Rhetoric.
practice what you preach  Always fol-
low the advice or instructions you give 
to others: Practice what you preach—it’s no 
use warning your children about the dangers 
of alcohol unless you are prepared to modify 
your own drinking habits. The proverb is of 
ancient origin.
praise no man till he is dead  Final judg-
ments on a person’s qualities can only 
become reliable after he or she is dead: 
The revelation that their former boss had been 
swindling the corporation’s pension fund made 
several employees wish they had observed the 
old proverb that warns against praising any 
man till he is dead. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in R. Taverner, Proverbs or Adages 
with New Additions, gathered out of the Chili-
ades of Erasmus (1540).
Variant of this proverb: praise day 
at night.
praise the bridge that carries you 
over  Do not criticize people or things 
that have helped you: On the principle that 
you should always praise the bridge that carries 
you over, I spoke out in defense of the system 
that had enabled me to continue my education 
after the death of my parents. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1678 in John Ray’s 
A Collection of English Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: everybody 
speaks well of the bridge that carries him 
over.
praise the child, and you make love to the 
mother  Parents—especially mothers—
are pleased and fl attered by compliments 
paid to their children: He struggled to think 
of something nice to say about her obnoxious 
son, anxious to win her favor and well aware 
that if you praise the child you make love to 
the mother. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1829 (W. Cobbett, Advice to Young Men), 
but with the implication that it had long 
been in general use.
a preacher’s son is often bad  See cler-
gymen’s sons always turn out badly.
prejudice is being down on what we are 
not up on  People automatically dislike 
or distrust anything they have no under-
standing of or familiarity with: Disparaging 
and offensive remarks like these are just a sign 
of ignorance—prejudice is being down on what 
we are not up on.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
prejudice is the child of ignorance.
prejudice is the child of ignorance  Prej-
udice is caused by a lack of knowledge or 
understanding: On the basis that prejudice is 
the child of ignorance, it is hoped that this new 
information campaign will pave the way for 
better race relations. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in William Hazlitt’s essay “On 
Prejudice” (c. 1821).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
prejudice is being down on what we are 
not up on.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: admiration is the daughter of 
ignorance.
practice makes perfect
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   226 1/29/07   5:12:55 PM
227
prevention is better than cure  It is 
better to prevent something undesir-
able from happening than to have to 
fi x it afterward: The debate was evenly 
divided between those who favored abortion 
on demand and those who felt that free con-
traception should be available to all, on the 
basis that prevention is better than cure. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1618, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: an ounce of prevention is worth 
a pound of cure; a stitch in time saves 
nine; who repairs not his gutters 
repairs his whole house.
the price of liberty is eternal vigi-
lance  Freedom can only be preserved 
by keeping a watch on any threat to it: 
The Treasury might wrangle over the cost 
of the nation’s defense, but the price of lib-
erty is eternal vigilance. An Irish proverb 
fi rst recorded by John Philpot Curran in 
1790, it became a favorite maxim of U.S. 
reformer Wendell Phillips in the mid-
19th century.
pride comes before a fall  See pride 
goes before a fall.
pride feels no pain  People are able to 
endure or ignore the physical discomfort 
caused by smart or fashionable clothes, 
shoes, or jewelry; also used in other 
situations where people tolerate physical 
suffering in order not to lose face: In those 
days women wore corsets that were sometimes 
so tightly laced as to cause internal injury, but 
pride feels no pain. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1614.
Variant of this proverb: pride feels 
no cold.
pride goes before a fall  Arrogance and 
overconfi dence often lead to humiliation 
or disaster; often used as a warning: “‘I 
suppose he thinks he’d be mayor himself,’ 
said the people of Blackstable. They pursed 
their lips. ‘Pride goeth before a fall’” (W. 
Somerset Maugham, Cakes and Ale, 1930). 
The proverb is of biblical origin—“Pride 
goeth before destruction, and an haughty 
spirit before a fall” (Proverbs 16:18)—and 
is sometimes regarded as a misquotation. 
The sentiment it expresses occurs in one 
of the fables of Aesop (sixth century b.c.), 
about a victorious fi ghting cock who fl ies 
up to a high place and crows in triumph, 
only to be carried off by a passing eagle.
Variant of this proverb: pride comes 
before a fall.
procrastination is the thief of time  If 
you constantly put off doing things, you 
will only waste the time in which they 
could have been done and will ultimately 
run out of time in which to do them: 
“They were virtuous young men, and 
lost no opportunity that fell in their way 
to make their livelihood. Their motto 
was in these words, namely, ‘Procrastina-
tion is the thief of time’” (Mark Twain, 
The Innocents Abroad, 1869). The proverb 
comes from Edward Young’s poem Night 
Thoughts (1742): “Procrastination is the 
thief of time;/Year after year it steals, till 
all are fl ed.” Other writers have different 
views on the subject: Oscar Wilde wrote, 
in The Picture of Dorian Gray (1891), “He 
was always late on principle, this principle 
being that punctuality is the thief of time,” 
and according to Ogden Nash, in The Prim-
rose Path (1935), “Far from being the thief 
of Time, procrastination is the king of it.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: never put off until tomorrow 
 procrastination is the thief of time
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   227 1/29/07   5:12:56 PM
228
what you can do today; there’s no 
time like the present.
promises, like piecrust, are made to be 
broken  People cannot be depended 
upon to keep their word: She promised never 
to mention the incident again, but promises, like 
piecrust, are made to be broken, and she couldn’t 
resist retelling the story—much to my embar-
rassment—at a dinner party the following week. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1681, in 
the periodical Heraclitus Ridens: “He makes 
no more of breaking Acts of Parliaments, 
than if they were like Promises and Pie-
crust made to be broken.”
Variant of this proverb: promises are 
like piecrust: easy made and easy broken.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: a man’s word is as good as his 
bond.
the proof of the pudding is in the eating 
Nothing can be properly judged until it is 
put to the test: The car is very attractive in 
its new design, and the improved performance 
fi gures look good on paper, but the proof of the 
pudding is in the eating—let’s go for a drive. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in the 17th century, but the senti-
ment it expresses is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: the proof is 
in the pudding.
a prophet is not without honor, save 
in his own country  People who give 
words of warning or wisdom are not 
heeded or appreciated by those closest 
to them: “In Florence the signori thought 
him an amusing fellow and his letters 
often made them laugh, but they had 
no great confi dence in his judgment and 
never followed his advice. ‘A prophet is 
not without honor save in his own coun-
try,’ he sighed” (W. Somerset Maugham, 
Then and Now, 1946). The proverb is of 
biblical origin in its current form: “A 
prophet is not without honor, save in his 
own country, and in his own house” (Mat-
thew 13:57).
Variant of this proverb: a prophet is 
without honor in his own country.
prosperity discovers vice; adversity, 
virtue  Wealth or good fortune often 
brings out the worst in a person, whereas 
hardship or misfortune brings out the 
best: The saying “Prosperity discovers vice; 
adversity, virtue” should not be used as an 
argument for withholding fi nancial assistance 
from the needy. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1732 in Thomas Fuller’s Gno-
mologia: Adagies and Proverbs.
prosperity is just around the corner 
Things will improve in the near future: 
Politicians are always telling us that prosperity 
is just around the corner—provided that we 
continue voting them into power—but over the 
past few years we seem to have done a complete 
tour of the block without tracking it down. The 
proverb originated at the time of the Great 
Depression, during the administration of 
President Herbert Hoover (1929–33), 
with whom it is generally associated.
providence is always on the side of the 
big battalions  Those with the great-
est strength, power, or infl uence always 
seem to have luck on their side and 
inevitably win the day: Not only do they 
outnumber us, but they also have better weap-
ons at their disposal. Providence is always 
on the side of the big battalions, and I see 
no point in fi ghting a battle that we can-
not possibly win. The proverb has been 
attributed to various people, notably 
promises, like piecrust, are made to be broken
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   228 1/29/07   5:12:56 PM
229
the French marshal Henri de Turenne 
(1611–75): “la fortune est toujours, comme 
disait le pauvre M. de Turenne, pour les gros 
bataillons [fortune is always, as poor 
Mr. de Turenne used to say, for the big 
battalions]” (Madame de Sévigné, letter 
dated December 22, 1673). The French 
writer Voltaire (1694–78) was of a dif-
ferent opinion: “Dieu n’est pas pour les 
gros bataillons, mais pour ceux qui tirent le 
mieux [God is on the side not of the big 
battalions, but of the best shots].”
Variant of this proverb: God is always 
on the side of the big battalions.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: might makes right; the weakest go 
to the wall.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the race is not to the swift, nor 
the battle to the strong.
punctuality is the politeness of kings  It 
is discourteous to be late, regardless of 
your rank or status: “Punctuality is the 
politeness of kings, and King Magnus is a 
model in that respect” (George Bernard 
Shaw, The Apple Cart, 1929). The proverb 
is attributed to King Louis XVIII (1755–
1824) in its French form “L’exactitude est 
la politesse des rois.” It was fi rst recorded in 
English in 1853, in the form “Punctuality 
is the virtue of princes.”
Variant of this proverb: punctuality 
is the politeness of princes.
punctuality is the soul of business  It 
is important to be on time for business 
appointments: Punctuality is the soul of busi-
ness, and most companies take a very dim view of 
job applicants who arrive late for their interviews. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1853 in T. 
C. Haliburton’s Sam Slick’s Wise Saws.
put fi rst things fi rst  See first things 
first.
put your best foot forward  Always 
make the most of your strengths and 
abilities; also used to urge people to make 
their best effort or be on their best behav-
ior: Put your best foot forward, and try to make 
a good impression at the outset. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in the 16th century. It 
occurs in Shakespeare’s play Titus Androni-
cus (2:3), “Come on, my lords, the better 
foot before.”
put your trust in God, and keep your 
powder dry  Do not pin all your hopes on 
divine assistance or intervention—always 
be prepared to take action yourself if neces-
sary: “Zwingli . . . believed in the necessity 
of war; while Luther put his sole trust in 
the Word of God. . . . Zwingli was a free 
republican; while Luther was a loyal monar-
chist. He belonged to the Cromwellian type 
of men who “trust in God and keep their 
powder dry” (Philip Schaff, History of the 
Christian Church, 1883–1893). The proverb 
is attributed to the English Civil War leader 
Oliver Cromwell (1599–1658), who is said 
to have given this advice to his troops at the 
battle of Edgehill in 1642. The word powder 
refers to gunpowder. The proverb has given 
rise to the cliché to keep one’s powder dry.
Variant of this proverb: trust in God 
and keep your powder dry.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
hope for the best and prepare for the 
worst.
 put your trust in God, and keep your powder dry
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   229 1/29/07   5:12:56 PM
ååå   å
230
the quarrel of lovers is the renewal 
of love  A loving relationship is often 
reestablished on a fi rmer footing after an 
argument: “The falling out of Lovers . . . is 
the renewal of Love. Are we not now bet-
ter friends than if we had never differed?” 
(Samuel Richardson, Sir Charles Grandison, 
1754). The proverb is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the Roman poet Terence’s 
Andria (second century b.c.): “Amantium 
irae amoris integratio est [Lovers’ quarrels 
are a strengthening of love].”
Variant of this proverb: the falling 
out of lovers is the renewing of love.
quickly come, quickly go  Something 
that arises suddenly is likely to disappear 
just as suddenly; also used of something 
that is rapidly gained and lost: It is an 
unpleasant illness, but rarely lasts more than 
a few days—quickly come, quickly go. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1869 in W. C. Hazlitt’s English Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
easy come, easy go.
quick ripe, quick rotten  See soon ripe, 
soon rotten.
quit while you are ahead  Give up doing 
something when you are in a good posi-
tion rather than risk what you have 
already gained: He was tempted to bet on one 
more game but remembered the adage “quit 
while you are ahead.” The proverb was 
first recorded c. 1350 in the Douce MS.
Variant of this proverb: leave off 
while the play is good.
q
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   230 1/29/07   5:12:56 PM
ååå   å
231
the race is not to the swift, nor the 
battle to the strong  Speed and power 
do not guarantee success—those who are 
slower and weaker may win through per-
severance or tactics: “Amongst the wild 
tribes of the Malay Archipelago there is 
also a racing match; and it appears from 
M. Bourien’s account, as Sir J. Lubbock 
remarks, that ‘the race, “is not to the 
swift, nor the battle to the strong,” but to 
the young man who has the good fortune 
to please his intended bride’” (Charles 
Darwin, The Descent of Man, 1871). The 
proverb is of biblical origin: “the race 
is not to the swift, nor the battle to the 
strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor 
yet riches to men of understanding, nor 
yet favor to men of skill; but time and 
chance happeneth to them all” (Ecclesi-
astes 9:11).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
slow and steady wins the race.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: providence is always on the side of 
the big battalions; the weakest go to 
the wall.
rain before seven, fi ne before eleven 
Rain early in the morning often heralds 
a fi ne day; occasionally applied to other 
things that start in an unpromising way: 
The weather forecast was not good, but my 
hopes were raised when I woke at dawn to the 
sound of rain beating on the window. Rain 
before seven, fi ne before eleven—perhaps the 
baseball game would not have to be canceled 
after all. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1835, but with the implication that it was 
already in use among amateur weather 
forecasters.
Variant of this proverb: rain before 
seven, clear before eleven.
rats desert a sinking ship  People tend 
to leave an organization, pull out of a 
project, or abandon a cause when they 
become aware that it is heading for disas-
ter; often used to imply disloyalty, or to 
predict the imminent failure of some-
thing: “What do you want HER to know 
how you are for? She don’t want to see 
’ee. She’s the rat that forsook the sinking 
ship! . . . And I stuck to un—the more 
fool I! Have that strumpet in the house 
indeed!” (Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure, 
1895). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in the 16th century, but a similar senti-
ment—referring to the notion that rats 
and mice always leave a house that is 
about to fall down—was expressed in the 
fi rst century a.d. by the Roman scholar 
Pliny the Elder.
Variant of this proverb: rats abandon 
a sinking ship.
r
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   231 1/29/07   5:12:56 PM
232
the receiver is as bad as the thief  See 
if there were no receivers, there 
would be no thieves.
red sky at night, sailor’s delight; red sky 
in the morning, sailors take warning  A 
red sky at sunset is a sign of fair weather 
the following day, but a red sky at sunrise 
means that bad weather is on the way: A 
spectacular sunset on Saturday evening was 
followed by a glorious day for our outing on 
Sunday, fulfi lling the promise of the old saying 
“Red sky at night, sailor’s delight; red sky in the 
morning, sailors take warning.” The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “When it is evening, 
ye say, It will be fair weather: for the sky 
is red. And in the morning, It will be foul 
weather to day: for the sky is red and 
lowring” (Matthew 16:2–3).
Variant of this proverb: red sky at 
night, shepherd’s delight; red sky in the 
morning, shepherd’s warning.
a reed before the wind lives on, while 
mighty oaks do fall  Those who are fl ex-
ible and relatively insignifi cant can survive 
crises that bring down more prominent 
people who are unable or unwilling to 
yield or adapt: Remembering the saying “A 
reed before the wind lives on while mighty 
oaks do fall,” he managed to hold on to his job 
through successive administrations by keeping a 
low profi le and adjusting his method of work-
ing in line with policy changes and prevailing 
trends. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde (c. 1385): 
“And reed that boweth down for every 
blast,/Ful lightly, cesse wynd, it wol 
aryse;/ But so nyl nought an ook whan 
it is cast.”
the remedy may be worse than the 
disease  Action taken to put something 
right is often more unpleasant or damag-
ing than the original problem: “‘But how 
much will it cost to win the day?’ asked 
Mme. Sechard. ‘Fees if you win, one 
thousand francs if we lose our case.’ ‘Oh, 
dear!’ cried poor Eve, ‘Why, the remedy 
is worse than the disease!’” (Honoré de 
Balzac, Eve and David, 1841–43). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1582, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of ancient 
origin. It occurs in one of the fables of 
Aesop (sixth century b.c.), about a group 
of pigeons who ask a hawk to defend them 
against a kite: once inside their cote, the 
hawk kills more of them in a single day 
than the kite could have killed outside in 
a whole year.
Variant of this proverb: the cure may 
be worse than the disease.
render unto Caesar that which is Cae-
sar’s  Give what you have to give to 
those who have a better claim to them: 
He did not want to hand the extra money over 
to the taxman, but his accountant persuaded 
him to render unto Caesar what was Caesar’s. 
A biblical quotation from Matthew 22:21, 
the proverb has changed somewhat from 
its original meaning, which is evident 
from its fuller biblical form: “Then saith 
he unto them, Render therefore unto 
Caesar the things which are Caesar’s; 
and unto God the things that are God’s.” 
An underlying message here is to keep 
worldly things separate from religion.
revenge is a dish best eaten cold  Ven-
geance is often more satisfying if it is 
exacted some time after the original 
offense; said when a wrong cannot be 
immediately avenged, or used to discour-
age somebody from retaliating in the heat 
of the moment: I’ll get my own back one of 
the receiver is as bad as the thief
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   232 1/29/07   5:12:56 PM
233
these days, but I’m in no hurry—revenge is a 
dish best eaten cold. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1885.
Variant of this proverb: revenge is a 
dish best served cold.
revenge is sweet  It is very satisfying to 
retaliate or avenge a wrong: “I am the man 
from whom you ran, the man you sought 
to slay./That you may note and gaze and 
gloat, and say ‘Revenge is sweet’,/In the 
grit and grime of the river’s slime I am 
rotting at your feet” (Robert Service, Bal-
lads of a Cheechako, “The Ballad of One-
Eyed Mike,” 1909). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1566, in William Painter’s 
Palace of Pleasure: “Vengeance is sweete vnto 
him, which in place of killing his enemy, 
giueth life to a perfect frende.” In his poem 
Paradise Lost (1667), John Milton observed, 
“Revenge, at fi rst, though sweet,/Bitter 
ere long, back on itself recoils.”
revolutions are not made with rose 
water  It is not possible to bring about 
drastic changes by pleasant, easy, or 
peaceful means, or without causing dam-
age or suffering: “On either side harm 
must be done before good can accrue—
revolutions are not to be made with rose 
water” (Lord Byron, letter dated Octo-
ber 3, 1819). The quotation is the fi rst 
recorded use of the proverb in English. It 
comes from a rhetorical question posed 
by the French writer Nicolas (1741–94): 
“Voulez-vous qu’on vous fasse des révolutions à 
l’eau rose [Do you expect revolutions to be 
made with rose water].”
riches have wings  Money is soon gone. 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “For riches 
taketh her to her wings, as an eagle, and 
fl ieth into the heaven” (Proverbs 23:5).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
money is round and runs away.
the rich get richer and the poor get 
poorer  Those who have money fi nd it 
easy to make more, while those who have 
none sink further into debt; often applied 
to a specifi c economic period, climate, or 
policy that favors the rich and disadvantages 
the poor: The most signifi cant result of this 
method of taxation is that the rich get richer and 
the poor get poorer. The proverb was popular-
ized in the early 20th century as a line from 
the song “Ain’t We Got Fun” (1921), by Gus 
Kahn and Raymond B. Egan, which also 
contains the facetious variant “The rich get 
rich and the poor get children.”
the rich man has his ice in the sum-
mer and the poor man gets his in the 
winter  It may seem that everybody, 
rich or poor, has an equal share of good 
fortune in life, but this is not so: “The 
rich get ice in the summer and the poor 
get it in the winter, so some people fi gure 
everyone gets an even break” (J. W. Rider, 
Jersey Tomatoes, 1986). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1921.
a rich man’s joke is always funny Wealthy 
people are surrounded by those who hope 
to win their favor by fl attery, such as, by 
laughing at all their jokes, whether they 
are funny or not: He went on to tell an 
anecdote that was in rather poor taste, but his 
host—who had invited him with a view to 
securing a lucrative sponsorship deal—laughed 
appreciatively. A rich man’s joke is always funny. 
The proverb comes from the writings of 
the poet T. E. Brown (1830–97).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
He that has a full purse never wanted a 
friend.
 a rich man’s joke is always funny
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   233 1/29/07   5:12:57 PM
234
a rising tide lifts all boats  Everybody 
benefi ts from an upward trend in a nation’s 
prosperity or quality of life: “The country 
was in a sharp economic expansion com-
ing out of ’82. This made everybody look 
smart—you know, the rising tide lifts 
all boats” (Washington Times, 1990). The 
proverb is associated with President John 
F. Kennedy, who used it in a speech in 
1963: “As they say on my own Cape Cod, 
a rising tide lifts all the boats.”
the road to hell is paved with good inten-
tions  Good intentions are of no value 
unless they are translated into action; also 
used when something done with good 
intentions has an undesirable or harmful 
effect: To those who constantly make vague 
promises of future support for our charity, I 
have only this to say: “The road to hell is 
paved with good intentions.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in English in 1574, in 
the form “Hell is full of good desires,” but 
it is has been attributed to Saint Bernard 
(1091–1153).
Variants of this proverb: the streets 
of hell are paved with promises; hell is 
full of good meanings, but heaven is full 
of good works.
the robin and the wren are God’s cock 
and hen  The robin and the wren are 
special birds in the eyes of heaven: the 
robin and the wren are God’s cock and hen: the 
martin and the swallow are God’s mate and 
marrow. The proverb appears in the Poetical 
Description of Song Birds (1787). The prov-
erb refl ects the time-honored superstition 
that it is unlucky to kill a robin or a wren. 
It may also have been infl uenced by the 
ancient misapprehension that the robin 
and the wren were the male and female of 
the same species.
Robin Hood could brave all weathers but 
a thaw wind  Of all kinds of weather, 
a raw wind after frost or snow is the 
most penetrating. The proverb appears in 
W. Neville, The Life and Exploits of Robin 
Hood (1855). In Yorkshire, England, where 
the historical Robin Hood may have lived, 
a cold wind from the north or east is called 
a “Robin Hood wind.”
a rolling stone gathers no moss  People 
who spend their lives traveling or moving 
around tend to accumulate few responsi-
bilities or personal attachments: “We keep 
repeating the silly proverb that rolling 
stones gather no moss, as if moss were a 
desirable parasite” (George Bernard Shaw, 
Misalliance, Preface, 1914). The proverb is 
probably of ancient origin: in his Adagia 
(1500) the Dutch humanist Desiderius 
Erasmus quotes Latin and Greek proverbs 
translated as “A rolling stone is not cov-
ered with moss” and “A rolling stone does 
not gather seaweed.”
Rome was not built in a day  It takes 
a lot of time and effort to achieve great 
things; used to encourage patience and 
perseverance: “‘These are early days, 
Trot,’ she pursued, ‘and Rome was not 
built in a day, nor in a year. You have 
chosen . . . a very pretty and a very 
affectionate creature. It will be your duty 
. . . to estimate her (as you chose her) 
by the qualities she has, and not by the 
qualities she may not have. The latter you 
must develop in her, if you can’” (Charles 
Dickens, David Copperfi eld, 1850). First 
recorded in English in 1545, the proverb 
is of ancient origin.
a rose by any other name would smell 
as sweet  It is the intrinsic qualities of 
a rising tide lifts all boats
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   234 1/29/07   5:12:57 PM
235
people and things that matter, not what 
they are called—names have no bearing 
on character or nature: “Anne looked 
thoughtful. ‘I read in a book once that a 
rose by any other name would smell as 
sweet, but I’ve never been able to believe 
it. I don’t believe a rose WOULD be as 
nice if it was called a thistle or a skunk 
cabbage’” (Lucy Maud Montgomery, Anne 
of Green Gables, 1908). The proverb comes 
from Shakespeare’s play Romeo and Juliet 
(2:2), “What’s in a name? that which we 
call a rose/By any other name would 
smell as sweet.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what’s in a name?
a rose is a rose is a rose is a rose  Things 
and people are what they are—you cannot 
defi ne them in any other way, or change 
their essential nature by giving them a 
different name: “A rose is a rose is a rose,” 
said Jerome M. Becker . . . ‘He commit-
ted the murder under the infl uence of 
RUSSIAN PROVERBS
Many Russian proverbs are regional equivalents of others found in the English-speaking 
world, but others would appear to have arisen uniquely from the Russian experience of hard-
ship and servitude over the centuries.
Ask a lot, but take what is offered
Better a bed of wood than a bier of gold
Don’t praise your furnace when the house is cold
Eat until you are half full; drink until you are half drunk
An enemy will agree, but a friend will argue
Eternal peace lasts until the next war
Eternity makes room for a salty cucumber
Even in the ashes there will be a few sparks
He who offers his back should not complain if it is beaten
Honor goes to God; the priests get the bacon
The horses of hope gallop, but the asses of experience go slowly
If you don’t have a hundred roubles, make sure you have a hundred friends
In Russia every day is of thirty hours
In the lake of lies there are many dead fi sh
No one is hanged who has money in his pocket
One cannot make a fur coat from a thank-you
Only chained bears dance
Thanks to one small candle the whole of Moscow burns
Vodka is the aunt of wine
Who lives in exile fi nds that spring has no charm
Who wants heat must endure the smoke
You can’t sew buttons on your neighbor’s mouth
Your body belongs to the Tsar, your soul to God, and your back to the squire
ååååå
 a rose is a rose is a rose is a rose
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   235 1/29/07   5:12:57 PM
236
cocaine and to me that’s simple: It’s mur-
der and his conduct was depraved’” (New 
York Times, 1989). The proverb comes from 
the U.S. writer Gertrude Stein’s Sacred 
Emily (1913).
the rotten apple spoils the barrel  A 
single bad individual can have a cor-
rupting infl uence on all those around 
him or her, or everybody with whom he 
or she comes into contact; also used to 
imply that one bad member of a group 
can create an unfavorable impression of 
the whole: If we wish to retain our politi-
cal neutrality, we must keep militants and 
activists out of the organization—the rotten 
apple spoils the barrel. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
in 1340.
Variants of this proverb: the rotten 
apple injures its neighbor; one bad apple 
spoils the lot.
rules are made to be broken  People 
would not bother to make rules if they 
did not expect them to be broken every 
now and then; often used to justify some 
minor infringement, especially of a rule 
considered to be petty, unnecessary, or 
inappropriate: I know we’re not supposed 
to take food and drink into the library, but 
rules are made to be broken. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1942 in F. Gruber’s 
Gift Horse.
the rotten apple spoils the barrel
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   236 1/29/07   5:12:57 PM
ååå   å
237
safe bind, safe fi nd  If you fasten things 
securely before you leave, or lock some-
body or something away, they will still 
be there when you return: “‘I’ll privately 
turn the key on her, in case she wakes 
before we come back. Safe bind, safe 
fi nd—you know the proverb!’” (Wilkie 
Collins, No Name, 1862). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in the form “Fast 
bind, fast fi nd.”
safety fi rst  Safety issues should always 
be the fi rst consideration: This company 
has adopted a safety fi rst policy. This proverb 
dates back to 1929, when it appeared in 
W. R. Inge’s Assessment and Anticipation: 
“‘Safety fi rst’ is all very well when we 
are preparing to cross a street or board 
an omnibus.”
Saturday’s child works hard for its living 
Children born on a Saturday are sup-
posed to be industrious and hardwork-
ing: Both her sons were born on a Saturday, 
and neither of them has bothered to look for 
a job since leaving college. So much for the 
saying “Saturday’s child works hard for its 
living”! The proverb is the sixth line of a 
traditional rhyme beginning “Monday’s 
child is fair of face.” See entries at the 
days of the week for other proverbs from 
this rhyme.
save at the spigot and waste at the 
bung  See spare at the spigot, and let 
out the bunghole.
save something for a rainy day  It is 
sensible to put money aside in case it is 
needed in the future: He remembered his 
grandmother’s advice to save something for a 
rainy day. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1583 in J. Stubbes’s Anatomie of Abuses.
save us from our friends  Our friends 
can cause us far more harm or trouble 
than our enemies; usually—but not 
exclusively—applied to false, treacher-
ous, or disloyal friends: She says she felt 
compelled, as one of my oldest friends, to tell 
my employers about my alcohol problem. All 
I can say is, “Save us from our friends!” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with differ-
ent wording, in 1477. Queen Elizabeth 
I is alleged to have said, in 1585, “There 
is an Italian proverb which saith, From 
my enemy let me defend myself; but 
from a pretensed friend, good Lord 
deliver me.”
Variant of this proverb: God pro-
tect me from my friends—I can protect 
myself from my enemies.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: with friends like that, who 
needs enemies?
s
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   237 1/29/07   5:12:57 PM
238
saving is getting  Money that is got 
through saving is as valuable as money that 
is earned. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1642 in G. Torriano’s Select Italian Prov-
erbs: “Saving is the fi rst getting.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a penny saved is a penny earned.
scrambled eggs can’t be unscram-
bled  See you can’t unscramble eggs.
scratch a Russian and you fi nd a Tartar 
What a person claims to be may be different 
from what he or she actually is: “Until a short 
time ago the aphorism, ‘Scratch a Russian and 
you fi nd a Tartar,’ was the sum of British com-
prehension of the Russian character” (Brit-
ish Spectator, 1911). Attributed to Napoleon 
Bonaparte (1769–1821), the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1823, but with 
the implication that it was already in gen-
eral use. Other words may be substituted 
for Russian and Tartar, as in the Republican 
slogan “Scratch a Democrat and you will 
fi nd a rebel.”
second thoughts are best  Do not act 
on impulse: “Second thoughts, they say, are 
best:/I’ll consider of it once again” (John 
Dryden, The Spanish Friar, 1681). The prov-
SCANDINAVIAN PROVERBS
The proverbs of the Scandinavian countries provide a glimpse into the history of those nations, 
including as they do a fair number of pithy observations based on the experience of harsh 
weather and a seafaring tradition going back to the Vikings.
Ambition and revenge are always hungry
Ask for advice, then use your head
Better ice that melts than fi re that extinguishes
Don’t praise the bread that is not out of the oven
Don’t sail out farther than you can row back
Even a small star shines in the dark
Fish bite best on a golden hook
Fresh air impoverishes doctors
Heaven dries what it has made wet
It is the great north wind that made the Vikings
It is too late to learn to swim when the water is up to your lips
Love has produced some heroes but many idiots too
A man without money is like a boat without sails
The most diffi cult mountain to cross is the threshold
No answer is also an answer
Nobody is too young to die tomorrow
Rain does not stay in the sky
A small cloud may hide both sun and moon
There is no wind that blows right for the sailor who does not know where the 
harbor is
The winter does not leave without a backward glance
åååååsaving is getting
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   238 1/29/07   5:12:57 PM
239
erb is of ancient origin, occurring in Eurip-
ides’ Hippolytus (fi fth century b.c.): “The 
second thoughts are invariably wiser.”
a secret is either too good to keep or 
too bad not to tell  It is very hard to 
keep a secret of any kind: You’ll never 
believe what Megan’s planning to do to that 
guy who dumped her last week. It’s a secret, of 
course, but you know what they say—a secret is 
either too good to keep or too bad not to tell. 
The proverb is a regional expression in the 
United States.
a secret’s a secret until it’s told  When 
you pass on a secret to somebody else, it 
ceases to be a secret: “Don’t tell anybody 
else—it’s a secret.” “It can’t be—a secret’s a 
secret until it’s told.”
Variant of this proverb: a secret 
shared is no secret.
see a pin and pick it up, all the day 
you’ll have good luck; see a pin and 
let it lay, bad luck you’ll have all the 
day  According to popular superstition, 
if you see a pin lying around, it is lucky 
to pick it up and unlucky not to; also 
used to encourage thriftiness: See a pin 
and pick it up, all the day you’ll have good 
luck—and you might also prevent somebody 
from getting a painful surprise if they kneel 
SCOTTISH PROVERBS
Scotland has a rich heritage in terms of proverbs, of which the following is merely a selection. 
A bad wound may heal, but a bad name will kill
A blind man needs no looking glass
The devil’s a busy bishop in his own diocese
A hungry man smells meat far
All that’s said in the kitchen should not be told in the hall
Enough’s as good as a feast
Every man to his taste, as the man said when he kissed his cow
From saving comes having
Get what you can and keep what you have; that’s the way to get rich
Good company on a journey is worth a coach
If I had a dog as daft, I would shoot him
If you don’t see the bottom, don’t wade
Laws catch fl ies, but let hornets go free
A man cannot wive and thrive the same year
Many a mickle makes a muckle
A nod’s as good as a wink to a blind horse
One whisky is all right; two is too much; three is too few
Penny wise and pound foolish
War makes thieves, and peace hangs them
A wise lawyer never goes to law himself
Ye may not sit in Rome and strive with the Pope
You will never know a man till you do business with him
åååååsee a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, . . .
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   239 1/29/07   5:12:57 PM
240
down or walk around barefoot. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1843.
Variants of this proverb: fi nd a penny, 
pick it up, all day long you’ll have good 
luck; see a pin and pick it up, all the day 
you’ll have good luck; see a pin and let it 
lie, you’ll want a pin before you die.
seeing is believing  People are often 
reluctant to believe something until they 
see it for themselves, but nobody doubts 
the evidence of his or her own eyes: “‘if you 
had seen de great huge pieces of de plate 
so massive, Sir Arthur,—so fi ne fashion, 
Miss Wardour—and de silver cross dat we 
did fi nd . . . you would have believed then.’ 
‘Seeing is believing indeed’” (Sir Walter 
Scott, The Antiquary, 1816). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1609.
seek and you shall fi nd  You must make 
a personal effort to get what you want: 
“‘What would you have me do?’ said 
Fernand. ‘How do I know? Is it my affair? 
I am not in love with Mademoiselle 
Mercedes; but for you—in the words 
of the gospel, seek, and you shall fi nd’” 
(Alexandre Dumas, The Count of Monte 
Cristo, 1844–45). The proverb is of bibli-
cal origin: “Ask, and it shall be given you; 
seek, and ye shall fi nd; knock, and it shall 
be opened unto you” (Matthew 7:7).
see no evil, hear no evil, speak no 
evil  Ignore any wrongdoing, malice, or 
gossip that is going on around you, and 
do not get involved: It’s no use asking him 
about the latest offi ce intrigue—his motto 
is “See no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil.” 
First recorded in 1926, the proverb is 
associated with a representation of three 
monkeys with their hands over their eyes, 
ears, and mouth, respectively.
seize the day  Live for the present, and 
take full advantage of every moment: 
Nobody knows what the future may hold, so 
seize the day. The proverb comes from the 
writings of the Roman poet Horace (65–8 
b.c.) and is often used in its original Latin 
form, “Carpe diem.” It was popularized in 
the late 20th century as the motto of the 
charismatic and unconventional English 
teacher John Keating, played by Robin 
Williams, in the movie Dead Poets Society 
(1989): “Carpe diem, lads! Seize the day! 
Make your lives extraordinary.”
Variant of this proverb: seize the 
moment.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomor-
row we die; gather ye rosebuds while 
ye may; life is short and time is swift; 
the mill cannot grind with the water 
that is past; take time by the forelock.
seldom seen, soon forgotten  Persons 
or things rarely seen or mentioned are 
quickly forgotten: At fi rst he seemed quite 
upset about the break-up of their relationship, 
but after a few weeks it was a case of seldom 
seen, soon forgotten. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1350 in the Douce MS.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
out of sight, out of mind.
self-deceit is the easiest of any  It is 
easy to convince yourself of something 
that you want to believe: She has persuaded 
herself that she is innocent of the charge, but 
self-deceit is the easiest of any, and she will 
fi nd it more diffi cult to persuade the judge and 
jury. The proverb is recorded as a regional 
expression in the United States.
self-interest is the rule, self-sacrifi ce the 
exception  People are far more con-
seeing is believing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   240 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
241
cerned with looking after their own inter-
ests than with sacrifi cing their needs for 
the sake of others: It was one of those rare 
occurrences, an act of pure altruism, in a world 
where self-interest is the rule and self-sacrifi ce 
the exception. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
self-praise is no recommendation 
Boast ful talk about your own abilities or 
achievements does not impress others, 
and may have the opposite effect—people 
often distrust those who have too high an 
opinion of themselves: “Self-praise is no 
recommendation, but I may say for myself 
that I am not so bad a man of business” 
(Charles Dickens, Bleak House, 1853). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1826, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: toot your own horn lest the same 
be never tooted.
self-preservation is the fi rst law of 
nature  Survival is the primary natural 
instinct of all living things; used when 
people take action to protect themselves 
or their own interests: The strike failed 
because not enough people were prepared to put 
their own jobs on the line for the sake of some-
body else’s—self-preservation is the fi rst law of 
nature. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
the English poet John Donne’s Biathana-
tos, a defense of suicide, probably written 
c. 1610 but not published until 1646: “It is 
onley upon this reason, that selfe-preser-
vation is of Naturall Law.”  The sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin, occur-
ring in the writings of Cicero (106–43 
b.c.): “primamque ex natura hanc habere 
appetitionem, ut conservemus nosmet ipsos [by 
nature our fi rst impulse is to preserve 
ourselves].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every man for himself and the devil 
take the hindmost.
send a fool to market and a fool he’ll 
return  It is unrealistic to expect a fool 
to change into anything but a fool: “You 
may go back again, like a fool as you 
came” (Jonathan Swift, Polite Conversation, 
1738). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1586 in G. Whitney’s Emblems. Variants of 
this proverb have the fool being sent “to 
France” or simply “far.”
set a beggar on horseback, and he’ll 
ride to the devil  People who suddenly 
acquire wealth or power are likely to be 
corrupted by it: “‘Set a beggar on horse-
back, and he’ll ride to the devil,’ . . . some 
of these early manufacturers did ride to 
the devil in magnifi cent style” (Elizabeth 
Gaskell, North and South, 1855).
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1669, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it 
to death.
set a sprat to catch a mackerel  See 
throw out a sprat to catch a mack-
erel.
set a thief to catch a thief  A person 
who has been involved in wrongdoing—
especially a reformed criminal—is good 
at catching others, because he or she can 
understand their thinking and anticipate 
their actions: “‘Set a thief to catch a thief,’ 
said Mr. Stryker, with his usual dry man-
ner. ‘I don’t believe in the full success of 
your virtuous diplomatist. How is a man 
to know all the turnings and windings of 
 set a thief to catch a thief
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   241 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
242
the road that leads to treaties, unless he 
has gone over it himself?’” (Susan Feni-
more Cooper, Elinor Wyllys, 1846). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1665, but with the implication that it 
had long been in general use. The senti-
ment it expresses occurs in the writings 
of the poet Callimachus (third century 
b.c.): “being a thief myself I recognized 
the tracks of a thief.”
Variant of this proverb: it takes a 
thief to catch a thief.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: it takes one to know one; an old 
poacher makes the best gamekeeper.
share and share alike  Things must be 
shared equally and fairly among those 
who want or have a right to their part: 
“‘Drink, Henry Fray—drink,’ magnani-
mously said Jan Coggan, a person who 
held Saint-Simonian notions of share and 
share alike where liquor was concerned, 
as the vessel showed signs of approach-
ing him in its gradual revolution among 
them. (Thomas Hardy, Far from the Mad-
ding Crowd, 1874). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1564.
the sharper the storm, the sooner it’s 
over  The more unpleasant something 
is, the less time it lasts: The unfortunate 
students who found themselves on the receiv-
ing end of his outbursts of rage used to console 
themselves with the saying “The sharper the 
storm, the sooner it’s over.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, in its variant form, 
in 1872. The sentiment it expresses, 
however, is of ancient origin: compare 
Seneca (c. 4 b.c.–a.d. 65), “procellae, 
quanto plus habent virium, tanto minus tem-
poris [the harder storms are, the shorter 
they last].”
Variant of this proverb: the harder 
the storm, the sooner it’s over.
the sheep that bleats loses a mouthful 
See a bleating sheep loses a bite.
shit happens  Sometimes you must 
resign yourself to the inevitability of bad 
things happening: The detective shrugged. “I 
don’t know why she died. She was just unlucky. 
Shit happens.” The proverb appears to 
be of late 20th-century U.S. origin. 
shit or get off the pot  See piss or get 
off the pot.
the shoe is on the other foot  The situ-
ation has been reversed: Now the shoe is on 
the other foot, and those responsible for laying 
off half the workforce are fi ghting to save their 
own jobs. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
the 19th century in the form “The boot is 
on the other leg.”
Variant of this proverb: the boot is 
on the other foot.
the shoemaker’s child always goes bare-
foot  People often fail to benefi t from 
the professional skills of those closest 
to them: “My mother always used to 
say, ‘The shoemaker’s family goes bare-
foot.’ Well . . . I married a plumber and 
every faucet in our house drips” (Wash-
ington Times, 1996). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in 
1546. Other words may be substituted 
for child, such as son, wife, or family, as in 
the quotation.
Variant of this proverb: the cobbler’s 
children go barefoot.
shoot fi rst and ask questions after-
ward  In certain circumstances—for 
share and share alike
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   242 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
243
example, when facing a potentially dan-
gerous person or thing—it is safer not 
to lose time weighing up the situation 
before taking action; often used in contexts 
criticizing such hasty or arbitrary behavior: 
“It struck her, too, that war seemed to 
have made the people on that side of the 
ocean extremely ready with weapons. They 
would be quite likely to shoot fi rst and ask 
questions afterward—which would be too 
late to be helpful” (Mary Roberts Rinehart, 
The Amazing Interlude, 1918).
Variant of this proverb: shoot fi rst, 
ask questions later.
a short horse is soon curried  A small 
task is soon done: A short horse is soon cur-
ried—it won’t take long to put the room back 
to rights. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1350 in Douce MS 52.
short reckonings make long friends  If 
you want to keep your friends, and retain 
goodwill in business, always pay your 
debts and settle your accounts promptly: 
“‘I will repay you in a minute,’ returned 
Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he 
spoke, counted out a hundred and forty 
francs, and pushed them towards Mme. 
Vauquer. ‘Short reckonings make good 
friends,’ he added” (Honoré de Balzac, 
Father Goriot, 1835). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1673 (J. Dare, 
Counsellor Manners) but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
short visits make long friends  People 
are unlikely to establish lasting friendships 
with visitors who outstay their welcome: 
The vicar did not appear to be familiar with 
the old saying “short visits make long friends,” 
for he stayed for over an hour. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1923 in Folk-Lore.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
fish and guests stink after three days.
show me a liar and I will show you a 
thief  People who are prepared to tell 
lies are likely to be dishonest in other ways 
too. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1607 in R. West’s The Court of Conscience.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a liar is worse than a thief.
the show must go on  Things must con-
tinue as if nothing had happened; used 
when events or circumstances threaten 
to disrupt something planned: The show 
must go on, as they say, and we cannot post-
pone the conference just because one of the 
delegates has been unfortunate enough to 
fall down the stairs and break his leg. Of 
theatrical origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1867 in the Dictionary of 
Americanisms.
shrouds have no pockets  Wealth and 
possessions are of no use to you after you 
are dead; often used to justify extravagant 
spending: There’s no point in hoarding money 
at your age—you have no children to leave it 
to, and shrouds have no pockets. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in 1854.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t take it with you.
a shut mouth catches no fl ies  It is 
often safest or wisest to say nothing: 
To avoid the risk of incriminating myself, I 
remained silent—a shut mouth catches no 
fl ies. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1599 in the form “In a closed up mouth a 
fl y cannot get in.”
Variant of this proverb: a closed 
mouth catches no fl ies.
 a shut mouth catches no fl ies
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   243 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
244
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a still tongue makes a wise head.
silence gives consent  Those who do 
not reply to a request or accusation, or 
who raise no objection to something said 
or done, are assumed to have acquiesced: 
“Of course I ought to have known that 
you could not care for a man like me, a 
stranger. Silence gives consent. Yes? Eh? 
I don’t want any of that sort of consent. 
And unless some day you fi nd you can 
speak . . . No! No! I shall never ask 
you” (Joseph Conrad, Chance, 1913). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, c. 1380 by John Wycliffe.
Variant of this proverb: silence 
means consent.
silence is golden  Silence is a quality 
of great value; often used as advice to 
say nothing, but also applied to a lack of 
environmental noise: “Silence is golden, 
as her father used to say when she used to 
fl y into tempers and wanted to say nasty 
things to everybody within range” (Aldous 
Huxley, Antic Hay, 1923). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1865 (W. White, 
Eastern England), but with the implication 
that it was already in general use.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: there is a time to speak, and a time 
to be silent; think before you speak; a 
word spoken is past recalling.
silence is the fi ttest reply to folly  The 
best way to respond to a foolish remark 
or action is to ignore it: I treated her ill-
informed and bigoted comments with the con-
tempt they deserved and said nothing—silence 
is the fi ttest reply to folly. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1948 in a U.S. proverb 
collection.
Variant of this proverb: silence is the 
best answer to the stupid.
silence means consent  See silence 
gives consent.
silly question, silly answer  See ask 
a silly question and you get a silly 
answer.
sin, sorrow, and work are the things that 
men can’t shirk  Nobody can lead a life 
that is utterly virtuous, happy, or idle: I 
wish I could stay longer, but I must get back 
to the offi ce—sin, sorrow, and work are the 
things that men can’t shirk. The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
sing before breakfast, cry before 
night  Those who wake up feeling happy 
and carefree often encounter sorrow or 
trouble before the end of the day: There 
must be some truth in the saying “Sing before 
breakfast, cry before night”—I often fi nd that 
my mood changes dramatically during the 
course of the day. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in J. 
Palsgrave’s L’éclaircissement de la Langue 
Française (1530).
Variants of this proverb: if you sing 
before breakfast, you’ll cry before supper; 
laugh before breakfast, cry before sunset.
six hours’ sleep for a man, seven for a 
woman, and eight for a fool  Women 
need more sleep than men, but only fools 
sleep for eight hours or more: “John Wes-
ley . . . considered that fi ve hours’ sleep 
was enough for him or any man. . . . The 
old English proverb, so often in the mouth 
of George III, was ‘six hours for a man, 
seven for a woman, and eight for a fool’” 
silence gives consent
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   244 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
245
(J. H. Friswell, The Gentle Life, 1864). The 
quotation is the fi rst recorded use of the 
proverb in this form, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of earlier origin. Variants 
of the proverb recommend fi ve or seven 
hours’ sleep for travelers, six or seven for 
students and scholars, eight for workmen, 
merchants, or children, and they say that 
only fools, knaves, or “lazy bodies” need 
more.
the sky’s the limit  There is virtually no 
limit to what can be achieved, earned, or 
spent: “Teenoso was one colt who proved 
himself a dream horse by remaining in 
training after winning a Derby deemed of 
dubious quality; a year later he won the 
King George VI and Queen Elizabeth. ‘The 
sky’s the limit for a four-year-old, though 
the opportunities in the Pattern are not 
there for fi llies,’ Geoff Wragg, Teenoso’s 
trainer, said” (Independent, 1989).
sleep is the brother of death  Sleep 
and death are related: “How wonderful is 
Death, Death his brother Sleep!” (Percy 
Bysshe Shelley, Queen Mab, 1813). The 
proverb is ultimately of Greek origin 
and appeared in the writings of Homer. 
Its earliest appearance in English dates 
from 1563, in The Mirror of Magistrates. 
The word brother is sometimes replaced 
by cousin.
a slice off a cut loaf isn’t missed  You 
can get away with wrongdoing, such as 
adultery or petty theft, if you are not the 
fi rst person to do it, or if the offended 
party is unlikely to notice the result: He 
tried to justify his behavior with sayings of 
dubious morality, such as “A slice off a cut 
loaf isn’t missed.” The proverb comes from 
Shakespeare’s play Titus Andronicus (2:1; 
1592): “What, man! more water glideth 
by the mill/Than wots the miller of; and 
easy it is/Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we 
know.”
Variant of this proverb: you never 
miss a slice from a cut loaf.
a slip of the lip will sink a ship  See 
loose lips sink ships.
sloth is the mother of poverty  The less 
work you do, the less money you will 
earn. If it were true that sloth is the mother 
of poverty, there would be no such thing as the 
idle rich. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1669 in Politeuphuia.
Variant of this proverb: sloth is the 
key to poverty.
sloth makes all things diffi cult, but 
industry makes all things easy  See all 
things are easy to industry, all things 
difficult to sloth.
slow and steady wins the race  Those 
who work or proceed at a gentle steady 
pace are more likely to achieve success 
than those who rush: We generally fi nd 
that students of average ability who apply 
themselves diligently throughout the course do 
better in their fi nal examinations than brighter 
students who leave all their studying to the last 
minute—slow and steady wins the race. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
Robert Lloyd’s poem “The Hare and the 
Tortoise” (1762): “The bets were won, 
the Hare awake,/When thus the victor 
Tortoise spake./ . . . /You may deride my 
awkward pace/But slow and steady wins 
the race.” The poem retells Aesop’s fable 
of the same name, dating from the sixth 
century b.c., about a race between these 
two animals. The hare sets off at great 
 slow and steady wins the race
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   245 1/29/07   5:12:58 PM
246
speed, stops for a rest and falls asleep, 
and wakes up to fi nd that the tortoise has 
plodded past it to the fi nishing line.
Variant of this proverb: slow but sure 
wins the race.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: fair and softly goes far in a day; 
make haste slowly; the race is not 
to the swift, nor the battle to the 
strong.
slow but sure  Something that is done 
slowly and carefully is more likely to be 
done thoroughly and correctly than some-
thing that is done in haste: “But, the lan-
guage of that country was quite gone from 
her, and she was forced to make signs. So 
she went on, getting better from day to 
day, slow, but sure, and trying to learn 
the names of common things” (Charles 
Dickens, David Copperfi eld, 1850). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1692. It has 
given rise to the adverbial phrase slowly 
but surely.
slow but sure wins the race  See slow 
and steady wins the race.
small choice in rotten apples  When 
faced with two or more equally undesir-
able options, it matters little which one 
you choose: “You can come shopping with 
me or you can stay at home and clean your 
room—which would you rather do?” “Small 
choice in rotten apples.” The proverb comes 
from Shakespeare’s play The Taming of the 
Shrew (1:1; 1593).
a small gift usually gets small thanks  If 
you give people less than they expect, 
they may be less grateful than you would 
like: I was not surprised by her lukewarm 
response—a small gift gets small thanks, and 
she is probably accustomed to receiving much 
more generous tips from her clients.
small is beautiful  Smallness can be an 
attractive and desirable quality: “In the 
19th century, some classical composers 
forgot (if they had ever known) the prin-
ciple that ‘small is beautiful’” (Washington 
Post, 1991). The proverb was fi rst used in 
1973 as the title of a book by the German-
born British economist E. F. Schumacher.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the best things come in small 
packages; little fish are sweet.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: big is beautiful.
small leaks sink big ships  See little 
leaks sink the ship.
small sorrows speak; great ones are 
silent  People are usually happy to talk 
about minor sorrows but tend to avoid dis-
cussing greater sadnesses: “The grief that 
does not speak whispers the o’er-fraught 
heart and bids it break” (William Shake-
speare, Macbeth). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1587 in T. Hughes’s 
The Misfortunes of Arthur, although it is ulti-
mately of ancient origin, appearing in the 
writings of Seneca.
small things affect light minds  See 
little things please little minds.
soft and fair goes far  Much can be 
achieved by adopting a calm and gentle 
approach: “Soft and fair, young lady. You 
that are going to be married think things 
can never be done too fast” (Oliver Gold-
smith, The Good-Natured Man, 1768). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1400 in 
Beryn.
slow but sure
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   246 1/29/07   5:12:59 PM
247
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the meek shall inherit the earth; 
softly, softly, catchee monkey.
a soft answer turns away wrath  A gen-
tle response will calm an angry person: 
“Speak briefl y and to the point, and even 
if the call is a disagreeable one, follow the 
proverb that ‘A soft answer turneth away 
wrath’” (Milla Alihan, Corporate Etiquette, 
1974). The proverb is of biblical origin in 
its current form: “A soft answer turneth 
away wrath: but grievous words stir up 
anger” (Proverbs 15:1). A facetious exten-
sion of the proverb is “A soft answer turns 
away wrath but has little effect on a door-
to-door salesman.”
softly, softly, catchee monkey  A 
patient, careful, and gentle approach is 
best when trying to catch a wily or elusive 
person or thing, especially a criminal: The 
operation must be carefully planned and followed 
through—softly, softly, catchee monkey. The 
proverb was first recorded in 1907 in 
G. Benham’s Cassell’s Book of Quotations.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: easy does it; soft and fair goes 
far.
so goes Maine, so goes the nation  See 
as maine goes, so goes the nation.
soldiers and travelers may lie in 
authority  See a traveler may lie with 
authority.
so many countries, so many customs 
Different nations and peoples have dif-
ferent ways of doing things, codes of 
behavior, and so on: When traveling abroad, 
remember the saying “So many countries, so 
many customs”—what is considered a friendly 
gesture in one place may be interpreted as an 
insult in another. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1582, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin, 
occurring in Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde 
(c. 1385): “In sondry londes [lands], son-
dry ben usages.”
Variant of this proverb: every coun-
try has its own customs.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every land has its own law; when 
in rome, do as the romans do.
so many men, so many opinions  Every-
body has his or her own way of thinking: 
The saying “So many men, so many opinions” 
was amply illustrated by the lively discussion at 
yesterday’s meeting, and it seems unlikely that 
agreement will ever be reached. The proverb is 
of ancient origin, occurring in the Roman 
poet Terence’s Phormio (second century 
b.c.): “quot homines tot sententiae.” It was 
fi rst recorded in English in Chaucer’s Can-
terbury Tales (c. 1390) in the form “As many 
heddes, as many wittes ther been.”
Variant of this proverb: as many 
men, as many opinions.
some folks speak from experience; oth-
ers, from experience, don’t speak  Peo-
ple often learn from experience that there 
are times when it is better to say nothing: 
There had been similar unrest at my previous 
workplace, and when I argued against the 
proposed strike—which subsequently failed—I 
was shouted down. So this time I kept my mouth 
shut—some folks speak from experience; others, 
from experience, don’t speak.
something is better than nothing  It is 
better to have or get less than we desire 
than nothing at all: I gave her a couple of dol-
lars—not much, I know, but something is better 
 something is better than nothing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   247 1/29/07   5:12:59 PM
248
than nothing. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1546, but a French equivalent 
was in use in the early 15th century.
Variant of this proverb: better some-
thing than nothing.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
half a loaf is better than no bread.
something is rotten in the state of 
Denmark  There is something wrong, or 
something suspicious going on, in a place, 
organization, or system; often used to 
imply corruption: “To the Parisian com-
mon man, meanwhile, one thing remains 
inconceivable: that now when the Bastille 
is down, and French Liberty restored, 
grain should continue so dear. . . . Is it 
Aristocrat forestallers; a Court still bent 
on intrigues? Something is rotten, some-
where” (Thomas Carlyle, The French Revo-
lution, 1837). The proverb comes from 
Shakespeare’s play Hamlet (1:4; 1600–01). 
It is often used in a shortened and allusive 
form, as in the quotation, or with another 
name in place of Denmark.
a son is a son till he gets him a wife, 
a daughter’s a daughter all of her 
life  Men tend to neglect or lose contact 
with their parents after marriage, whereas 
women maintain the bonds of fi lial affec-
tion and loyalty throughout their lives: I 
hardly ever see Frank and his family, though they 
live much closer than Annabel, who still comes 
to visit me once a month. I guess I shouldn’t 
be surprised—a son is a son till he gets him a 
wife, a daughter’s a daughter all of her life. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1670 (John 
Ray, A Collection of English Proverbs).
Variant of this proverb: my son is 
my son till he gets him a wife, but my 
daughter’s my daughter all the days 
of her life.
the sooner begun, the sooner done  The 
sooner you make a start on some-
thing—especially a diffi cult or unpleas-
ant task—the sooner it will be fi nished: 
I’m not looking forward to clearing out the 
attic, but the sooner begun, the sooner done. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1578 
in T. Garter’s Most Virtuous Susanna.
sooner said than done  See easier said 
than done.
soon ripe, soon rotten  Precocious tal-
ent or premature success is often short-
lived: “Very few prize boys and girls 
stand the test of wear. Prodigies are 
almost always uncertain; they illustrate 
the proverb of ‘soon ripe, soon rot-
ten’” (Samuel Smiles, Life and Labour, 
1887). Of Latin origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English, with differ-
ent wording, in William Langland’s Piers 
Plowman (c. 1377).
Variants of this proverb: early 
ripe, early rotten; quick ripe, quick 
rotten.
sorrow comes unsent for  Sorrows will 
descend upon all individuals, however 
unwelcome they may be. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1579 in Edmund Spens-
er’s The Shepheardes Calendar: “Sorrow, ne 
neede be hastened on:/For he will come 
without calling anon.”
Variants of this proverb: sorrow and 
ill weather come uninvited; sorrow is 
soon enough when it comes.
sow dry and set wet  Seeds should be 
sown in dry soil and seedlings should be 
planted in wet soil: The old country saying 
“Sow dry and set wet” has a sound scientifi c 
basis—too much moisture will rot the seed 
something is rotten in the state of Denmark
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   248 1/29/07   5:12:59 PM
249
before it has a chance to germinate. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1660: S. Riders, 
Riders: 1660 British Merlin.
sow the wind and reap the whirlwind  See 
they that sow the wind shall reap the 
whirlwind.
spare and have is better than spend and 
crave  It is better to use your money 
wisely, keeping some in reserve, than to 
spend it all and fi nd yourself in need: I 
resisted the temptation to blow my winnings 
on an expensive vacation—spare and have 
is better than spend and crave. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1758, in Benjamin 
Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
spare well and have to spend.
spare at the spigot, and let out the 
bunghole  Those who are reluctant to 
part with small sums of money are often 
careless or extravagant in their spend-
ing on other things; also used to warn 
against false economy: “People are often 
saving at the wrong place. . . . They spare 
at the spigot, and let all run away at the 
SOUTH AMERICAN PROVERBS
The various peoples of South America share a large stock of proverbs covering most aspects 
of daily life. As well as succinct observations on everyday routine, these include a fair number 
of pithy sayings refl ecting the region’s strong religious traditions.
The baby who does not cry is not nursed
A dog that barks all the time gets little attention
A dog with many masters dies of starvation
Even the candle seller dies in the dark
For our sins God has created three enemies for us: mice in the house, the fox in 
the mountains, and a priest in our village
God is big, but the forest is bigger
God writes on crooked lines
Hands that give also receive
He who prays a lot is afraid of something
He who saves up for another day has no trust in God
If it were ever to rain soup, the poor would only have forks
If you have a tail of straw, then keep away from the fi re
Laughing wife, crying purse
No one knows as much about the pot as does the spoon
A sleeping fox fi nds no meat
The one who loves you will also make you weep
That which is a sin in others is a virtue in ourselves
There is nothing hidden between heaven and earth
Tomorrow is as good as today
You make a road by walking on it
ååååå spare at the spigot, and let out the bunghole
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   249 1/29/07   5:12:59 PM
250
bunghole” (E. J. Hardy, How to Be Happy 
though Married, 1885). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1642 in a collection of 
Italian proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: save at the 
spigot and waste at the bung.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
penny wise and pound foolish.
spare the rod and spoil the child  Firm 
discipline is necessary for a good upbring-
ing; used to justify the punishment of 
children when they misbehave, specifi -
cally to justify corporal punishment: “‘I 
shall govern by affection, Mr. Harrison.’ 
‘It won’t do,’ said Mr. Harrison, ‘won’t do 
at all, Anne. “Spare the rod and spoil the 
child.’” (Lucy Maud Montgomery, Anne of 
Avonlea, 1909). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “He that spareth his rod hateth his 
son: but he that loveth him chasteneth 
him betimes” (Proverbs 13:24).
SPANISH PROVERBS
As with many other countries, the proverbs of the Spanish reveal much about traditional 
national preoccupations. Among many other subjects may be found proverbs that relate to the 
family, music, prevarication, religion, and gossip.
Beware of women with beards and men without beards
Don’t call me a little olive until you have picked me
A face that never laughs betrays an evil heart
God is good, but not crazy
The hand of the stranger is heavy
Her father’s fortune will make the ugliest girl attractive
How beautiful it is to do nothing, and then rest afterward
I dance to the tune that is played
If I die, I forgive you; if I recover, we shall see
If you have nothing better to do, go to bed with your own wife
Insults should be well avenged or well endured
Italians talk to women, Frenchmen to the learned, and the Spaniard talks to God
The man deliberates, the woman decides
A mother-in-law made of sugar still tastes bitter
Only God helps the badly dressed
An ounce of mother is worth a ton of priest
Soup must be hot, insults cold
Spanish is the language of lovers, Italian is for the singer, French for diplomats, 
and German for horses
There is no woman who sleeps so deeply that the sound of a guitar will not bring 
her to the window
There was already twenty in the family, so my grandmother had a baby
Three Spaniards, four opinions
Tomorrow is often the busiest day of the week
Who gossips with you will gossip about you
åååååspare the rod and spoil the child
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   250 1/29/07   5:12:59 PM
251
spare well and have to spend  If you do 
not waste money you will always be able 
to afford the things you need: “Spare well 
and have to spend” was his motto, but he seemed 
to place far greater emphasis on the sparing 
than on the spending, and his reputation as a 
miser was not unjustifi ed. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1541.
Variant of this proverb: spare well 
and spend well.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: spare and have is better than spend 
and crave; spare when you’re young 
and spend when you’re old.
spare when you’re young and spend 
when you’re old  People who were 
thrifty in their youth can afford to be 
extravagant in their old age: I’m paying 
as much as I can afford into a private pension 
plan, on the basis of the saying “Spare when 
you’re young and spend when you’re old.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1721, in 
H. Bullinger’s Christian State of Matrimony.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
spare well and have to spend.
speak not of my debts unless you mean 
to pay them  It is considered rude or 
tactless to mention another person’s 
debts: I had heard rumors that his company 
was in severe fi nancial trouble, so I tried to steer 
the conversation onto other matters, remember-
ing the adage “Speak not of my debts unless 
you mean to pay them.” The proverb is fi rst 
recorded in George Herbert’s Outlandish 
Proverbs (1640).
speak of the devil and he always 
appears   People often appear unexpect-
edly when others are talking about them; 
said when such a coincidence occurs: I hear 
Jack’s found himself a job at last. . . . Ah, here he 
is, so he can tell us all about it. Speak of the devil 
and he’s sure to appear! The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666 in the form “Talk of the 
devil, and he’s presently at your elbow.” It 
is often used in the shortened and allusive 
form “Speak of the devil.”
Variants of this proverb: talk of the 
devil and he’s sure to appear; talk about 
the devil and his imps will appear.
speak softly and carry a big stick  Do 
not threaten violence or provoke aggres-
sion, but be prepared to use great force 
if the need arises: Their policy of  “Speak 
softly and carry a big stick” seems at last to 
have brought peace to the streets of the city. 
The proverb was popularized in a speech 
made in 1901 by President Theodore 
Roosevelt: “There is a homely old adage 
which runs: ‘Speak softly and carry a big 
stick; you will go far.’ If the American 
nation will speak softly and yet build and 
keep at a pitch of the highest training a 
thoroughly effi cient navy, the Monroe 
Doctrine will go far” (Speech at the Min-
nesota State Fair).
speak the truth and shame the devil  See 
tell the truth and shame the devil.
speak well of the dead  See never speak 
ill of the dead.
speech is silver, but silence is golden  It 
is good to speak, but sometimes it is bet-
ter still to say nothing: “She will give a 
pound note to the collection if I would 
cut my eloquence short, so in this case, 
though speech is silver, silence is certainly 
golden” (Winifred Holtby, South Riding, 
1936). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1834, with the implication that it was of 
Swiss origin.
 speech is silver, but silence is golden
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   251 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
252
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: there is a time to speak and a time 
to be silent; think before you speak; a 
word spoken is past recalling.
the spirit is willing but the fl esh is 
weak  People are often physically inca-
pable of doing what they want to do, or 
what they know they ought to do; often 
used as an excuse: “Since then I have 
written many other books; and though 
ceasing my methodical study of the old 
masters (for though the spirit is willing, 
the fl esh is weak), I have continued with 
increasing assiduity to try to write bet-
ter” (W. Somerset Maugham, The Sum-
ming Up, 1938). The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “Watch and pray, that ye enter 
not into temptation: the spirit indeed is 
willing, but the fl esh is weak” (Matthew 
26:41).
the squeaky wheel gets the grease 
Those who complain the most loudly or 
persistently, or who make the most fuss, 
get what they want: “Do as others have 
done—put heat on your state legislature 
and urge your friends to do the same. The 
wheel that squeaks get the oil” (Washington 
Post, 1990). The proverb is attributed to 
the U.S. humorist Josh Billings, alias 
Henry Wheeler Shaw (1818–85), in the 
form “The wheel that squeaks the loudest 
is the one that gets the grease.”
Variants of this proverb: the squeaky 
wheel gets the oil; the wheel that does the 
squeaking is the one that gets the grease.
stand on your own two feet  Do not be 
dependent on others: Stand on your own 
two feet—your parents will not be around 
forever, and you must learn to be more self-
reliant. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in L. Fioravanti’s Compendium of Rational 
Secrets (1582).
step on a crack, break your mother’s 
back  It is unlucky to walk on the cracks 
between paving slabs on the sidewalk; a 
childish superstition, or used in a chil-
dren’s game: “Look out!” cried my young 
nephew, as I was about to put my foot down, 
“Step on a crack, break your mother’s back!”
a stern chase is a long chase  It takes 
a long time to catch up with something or 
somebody moving ahead of you in the same 
direction: “English poetry has had a start of 
some centuries, and a stern chase is prover-
bially a long one” (J. A. Bridges, Victorian 
Recollections, 1919). First re corded in 1823, 
the proverb is of nautical origin—a stern 
chase is a chase at sea in which one vessel 
follows in the wake of another.
sticks and stones may break my bones, 
but names will never hurt me  Verbal 
abuse, malicious remarks, or defamatory 
statements do no physical harm; often 
said by children to those who call them 
names: When the other kids teased me about 
the clothes my mother made me wear, I would 
reply, “Sticks and stones may break my bones, 
but names will never hurt me.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in G. F. Northall’s Folk-
Phrases (1894).
Variant of this proverb: sticks and 
stones may break my bones, but words 
will never hurt me.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
hard words break no bones.
Proverb expressing opposite meaning: 
the tongue is not steel, but it cuts.
stick to your guns  Stand by your prin-
ciples or convictions, assert your rights, and 
the spirit is willing but the fl esh is weak
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   252 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
253
refuse to compromise: Stick to your guns—to 
give way on this issue would be interpreted as 
a sign of weakness. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded, with different wording, in James 
Boswell’s The Life of Samuel Johnson (1791): 
“Mrs. Thrale stood to her gun with great 
courage, in defence of amorous ditties.”
a still tongue makes a wise head  A 
wise person knows when it is best to keep 
silent; also used to imply that wisdom is 
gained by listening and thinking rather than 
talking all the time: When people commented 
that her son was unusually quiet for a boy of his 
age, she would reply, “A still tongue makes a wise 
head.” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1562 in the Works of John Heywood.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a shut mouth catches no flies.
still waters run deep  People who are 
quiet and reserved often have a deeply 
passionate nature and may surprise others 
by doing something that is apparently out 
of character: “‘Madame Odintsov is very 
charming, but she is so cold and reserved 
that . . .’ ‘Still waters run deep, you know,’ 
interposed Bazarov. ‘You say she is cold; 
that just adds to the fl avor. You like ices, I 
expect’ ” (Ivan Turgenev, Fathers and Sons, 
1862). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English c. 1400 in the form “Where the 
fl ood is deepest the water stands still-
est.” It occurs in Shakespeare’s play Henry 
VI, Part 2 (3:1; 1592), “Smooth runs the 
water where the brook is deep,/And in his 
simple show he harbours treason.”
Variant of this proverb: still water 
runs deep.
a stitch in time saves nine  Prompt 
attention to minor problems will avoid 
major problems later: “‘We could set it up 
as good as new in a day. For I daresay your 
lot would turn to and give us a hand?’ 
‘You see if we don’t,’ said Wicks. ‘So be it, 
then,’ concluded Trent. ‘A stitch in time 
saves nine.’” (Robert Louis Stevenson, 
The Wrecker, 1892). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1732. It is believed that the 
number nine was chosen because it almost 
rhymes with time.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: an ounce of prevention is worth 
a pound of cure; prevention is bet-
ter than cure; who repairs not his 
gutters repairs his whole house.
stolen fruit is sweet  See forbidden 
fruit is sweet; stolen waters are 
sweet.
stolen waters are sweet  Illicit pleasures 
are often all the more enjoyable for this 
reason; also used of the pleasure derived 
from stolen goods or ill-gotten gains: He 
reckons that no liquor tastes as good as the 
moonshine his uncle used to make, perhaps 
on the basis that stolen waters are sweet. 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Stolen 
waters are sweet, and bread eaten in 
secret is pleasant” (Proverbs 9:17).
Variants of this proverb: stolen fruit 
is sweet; stolen pleasures are sweetest.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
forbidden fruit is sweet.
stone-dead hath no fellow  There is 
nothing so fi nal as death; used by those in 
favor of capital punishment: “The execu-
tion of the death sentence had been post-
poned for a week, an unusual period in a 
country where the adage ‘stone-dead hath 
no fellow’ wins general support” (Lon-
don Times, 1926). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1633.
 stone-dead hath no fellow
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   253 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
254
stone walls do not a prison make  The 
mind and spirit are not imprisoned by 
merely physical restraints: “The poet 
assures us that—‘Stone walls do not a 
prison make,’ but a combination of the 
stone wall, the political parasite and the 
moral instructor is no garden of sweets” 
(Ambrose Bierce, Devil’s Dictionary, 
1911). The proverb comes from Richard 
Lovelace’s poem “To Althea, From Prison” 
(1642): “Stone walls do not a prison 
make/Nor iron bars a cage.”
straws show which way the wind 
blows  Small things, such as apparently 
trivial details or insignifi cant events, can 
be useful indicators of what is going 
to happen in the future: Journalists must 
learn to be highly observant, and not to 
dismiss any detail as insignifi cant—straws 
show which way the wind blows. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in John Selden’s Table 
Talk (c. 1654): “Take a straw and throw 
it up into the Air, you shall see by that 
which way the Wind is.” It-is probably of 
earlier origin, however, and-is attributed 
to Francis Bacon (1561–1626) in Lord 
Byron’s poem “Don Juan” (1819): “You 
know, or don’t know, that great Bacon 
saith,/‘Fling up a straw, ’twill show the 
way the wind blows.’” The proverb has 
given rise to the fi gurative phrases a straw 
in the wind and to know (or see, fi nd out,) 
which way the wind blows.
Variant of this proverb: it’s as well 
to know which way the wind blows.
a stream cannot rise above its 
source  Nothing can be greater or bet-
ter than what it comes from, or than the 
person who created it: “Just as it is true 
that a stream cannot rise above its source, 
so it is true that a national literature can-
not rise above the moral level of the social 
conditions of the people from whom it 
derives its inspiration” (James Connolly, 
Labour in Irish History, 1910). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1663.
Variant of this proverb: a stream 
never rises higher than its source.
the streets of hell are paved with 
promises  See the road to hell is 
paved with good intentions.
stretch your arm no further than your 
sleeve will reach  Do not try to live 
beyond your means, or to do more than 
you are capable of: Stretch your arm no fur-
ther than your sleeve will reach—you may be 
able to raise enough money to buy the boat, but 
can you afford all the running costs, mooring 
fees, and insurance? The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1541.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: cut your coat according to your 
cloth; everybody stretches his legs 
according to the length of his cov-
erlet.
strike while the iron is hot  Take advan-
tage of a favorable situation while it lasts: 
“Let George cut in directly and win her. 
. . . Strike while the iron’s hot” (William 
Makepeace Thackeray, Vanity Fair, 1848). 
An allusion to the work of the blacksmith, 
the proverb was fi rst recorded in English 
in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): 
“Whil that iren is hoot, men sholden 
smyte.” The sentiment it expresses, how-
ever, is of ancient origin. The English poet 
John Dryden expanded on the metaphor 
in “Aeneis” (1697), his translation of Vir-
gil’s Aeneid: “We must beat the iron while 
it is hot, but we may polish it at leisure.” 
The U.S. writer Ambrose Bierce paro-
stone walls do not a prison make
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   254 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
255
died the proverb in his Devil’s Dictionary 
(1911): “Strike while your employer has 
a big contract.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: hoist your sail when the wind is 
fair; make hay while the sun shines.
strive not against the stream  Do not 
struggle against things that cannot be over-
come, or try to do the impossible; also 
used to encourage conformity: “Never 
strive against the stream, always drive the 
nail that will go” (Matthew Prior, Four Dia-
logues of the Dead, “The Vicar of Bray and 
Sir Thomas More,” c. 1721). Of ancient 
origin, the proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English c. 1300.
Variant of this proverb: it’s ill striv-
ing against the stream.
stuff a cold and starve a fever  See feed 
a cold and starve a fever.
a stumble may prevent a fall  A minor 
check may prevent greater disaster: It was 
an unfortunate setback, but we must remember 
that a stumble may prevent a fall. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1732 in Thomas 
Fuller’s Gnomologia.
Variant of this proverb: it’s a good 
horse that never stumbles.
the style is the man  A person’s style, 
especially in speaking and writing, is an 
indicator of his or her true nature: “‘The 
style is the man.’ This applies with pecu-
liar force to Paul. His style has been called 
‘the most personal that ever existed.’ It 
fi tly represents the force and fi re of his 
mind and the tender affections of his 
heart” (Philip Schaff, History of the Chris-
tian Church, 1883–93). First recorded in 
English in 1901, the proverb may be of 
Latin or French origin: in his Discours sur 
le style (1753), the Comte de Buffon said, 
“Ces choses sont hors de l’homme, le style est 
l’homme même [These things are external 
to the man; style is the man].”
success breeds success  One success 
leads to another: Success breeds success, 
and within a few years she had a chain of 
health-food stores stretching from coast to 
coast. The proverb was first recorded in 
1927 in N. Martin’s Mosaic.
Variants of this proverb: success 
begets success; success makes success as 
money makes money.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
nothing succeeds like success.
success has many fathers, while fail-
ure is an orphan  Everybody want to 
take credit for success, but nobody will 
take responsibility for failure: “In the 
aftermath of the impeccably executed 
aerial attack that initiated the war with 
Iraq, the old saw that success has many 
fathers while failure is an orphan comes 
to mind” (Washington Times, 1991). The 
proverb may have originated in the diary 
of Mussolini’s son-in-law, the Italian dip-
lomat Count Galeazzo Ciano (1903–44): 
“La vittoria trova cento padri, e nessuno vuole 
riconoscere l’insuccesso [Victory has a hun-
dred fathers, and nobody acknowledges 
a failure].”
Variant of this proverb: victory has a 
hundred fathers and defeat is an orphan.
success is never fi nal  You cannot afford 
to relax your efforts after a great achieve-
ment—you must keep working to main-
tain or improve your position: History is 
littered with examples of those who forgot that 
success is never fi nal in the world of politics.
 success is never fi nal
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   255 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
256
Variant of this proverb: success is 
never fi nal and failure is never fatal.
success makes success as money makes 
money  See success breeds success.
sue a beggar and catch a louse  There 
is nothing to be gained by seeking legal 
redress from those who cannot afford to 
pay: What is the point of entering into liti-
gation with a company on the verge of bank-
ruptcy? Sue a beggar and catch a louse. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1639 in J. 
Clarke’s Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina.
Variant of this proverb: sue a beggar 
and you’ll get a louse.
suffi cient unto the day is the evil there-
of  There is quite enough to worry about 
at the present time, without anticipating 
future problems and troubles: “In the 
meanwhile there were no sense in wor-
rying over schemes for a future, which 
we may not live to see. ‘Suffi cient for the 
day is the evil thereof’” (Jane Carlyle, 
letter dated April 1, 1836). The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “Take therefore no 
thought for the morrow: for the morrow 
shall take thought for the things of itself. 
Suffi cient unto the day is the evil thereof ” 
(Matthew 6:34).
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
don’t cross the bridge till you come 
to it; take things as they come.
the sun loses nothing by shining into a 
puddle  Those who are truly great cannot 
be corrupted by association with foul or 
wicked things or people: As Chaucer said, 
the Bible is no less holy for describing the worst 
sins of humankind—the sun loses nothing by 
shining into a puddle. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1303, but the senti-
ment it expresses is of ancient origin: the 
saying “the sun shines into dung but is not 
tainted” is attributed to the Greek philoso-
pher Diogenes (c. 412–c. 323 b.c.).
Variant of this proverb: the sun is not 
less bright for shining on a dunghill.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: he that touches pitch shall be 
defiled; if you lie down with dogs, 
you’ll get up with fleas.
sweep your own doorstep clean  Do 
not criticize others until you are beyond 
reproach yourself: You have no right to 
accuse them of wasting public money, when 
your own department is squandering huge 
amounts on needless bureaucracy—sweep your 
own doorstep clean! The proverb is fi rst 
recorded in T. Adams’s Temple (1624).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if every man would sweep his 
own doorstep the city would soon be 
clean; physician, heal thyself.
the sweetest wine makes the sharpest 
vinegar  See from the sweetest wine, 
the tartest vinegar.
success makes success as money makes money
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   256 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
ååå   å
257
the tailor makes the man  A person’s 
qualities may be judged by the clothes 
they wear: “Believe it, sir, that clothes do 
much upon the wit . . . and thence comes 
your proverb, the tailor makes the man” 
(Ben Jonson, The Staple of News, 1625). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1605 in 
William Shakespeare’s King Lear.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
clothes make the man.
take a hair of the dog that bit you 
Drinking more alcohol is supposed to be a 
cure for a hangover: “‘Rouse yourself, lion-
heart. Ha ha! Put a good face upon it, and 
drink again. Another hair of the dog that 
bit you, captain! . . .’ Mr Tappertit received 
these jovial promptings with a very bad 
grace, being much the worse, both in mind 
and body, for his two nights of debauch” 
(Charles Dickens, Barnaby Rudge, 1841). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546. It 
alludes to the former practice of treating a 
dog bite by putting a hair from the offend-
ing animal into the wound.
Variant of this proverb: the hair of 
the dog is good for the bite.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
like cures like.
take care of number one  Put your own 
interests before those of everybody else: 
My motto is “Take care of number one,” and I’m 
not going to risk losing my job for the sake of a 
hopeless cause. The proverb is fi rst recorded 
in Maria Edgeworth, The Parent’s Assistant 
(1796): “I’m only talking of number one, 
you know. I must take care of that fi rst.”
Variant of this proverb: look out for 
number one.
take care of the pennies and the dollars 
will take care of themselves  If you are 
careful with small sums of money, you will 
always have plenty—attend to the details 
of your fi nancial affairs and do not worry 
about the larger picture. Its original form 
has pence and pounds in place of pennies 
and dollars: “Take care of the pence and 
the pounds will take care of themselves 
is as true of personal habits as of money” 
(George Bernard Shaw, Pygmalion, 1912). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1750 in 
a letter written by Lord Chesterfi eld, in 
which it is attributed to “Old Mr. Lowndes 
[William Lowndes (1652–1724)], the 
famous Secretary of the Treasury.” In Alice’s 
Adventures in Wonderland (1865), Lewis Car-
roll punningly applied the proverb to 
language: “Take care of the sense, and the 
sounds will take care of themselves.”
Variant of this proverb: look after 
the pennies and the dollars will look after 
themselves.
t
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   257 1/29/07   5:13:00 PM
258
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
light gains make heavy purses.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: penny wise and pound foolish.
take opportunity by the forelock  See 
take time by the forelock.
take the goods the gods provide  Make 
the most of anything you have or get by 
good fortune: If you have a natural talent 
for music, you should not feel guilty about 
using it to make money—take the goods 
the gods provide. In its current form, the 
proverb comes from John Dryden’s poem 
“Alexander’s Feast” (1697): “Lovely Thais 
sits beside thee,/Take the good the gods 
provide thee.” The sentiment it expresses, 
however, occurs in the writings of the 
Roman dramatist Plautus (c. 250–184 
b.c.): “habeas quod di dant boni [you may 
keep what good the gods give].”
take the will for the deed  We must 
always give people credit for their good 
intentions, even if they fail to carry them 
through: Take the will for the deed—she 
would have come to visit you at the hospital if 
there hadn’t been a railroad strike.
take things as they come  Sometimes it 
is best to deal with possible problems only 
as they arise: She decided to stop worrying 
about the future and just to take things as they 
came. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1611 in J. Davies’s The Scourge of Folly.
Variant of this proverb: take things as 
you fi nd them.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t cross the bridge till you come 
to it; don’t meet troubles halfway; 
sufficient unto the day is the evil 
thereof.
take time by the forelock  Take full 
advantage of the present, and do not 
waste time: “As his doing the one or the 
other was a mere question of time, he 
and Mrs. Pocket had taken Time by the 
forelock (when, to judge from its length, 
it would seem to have wanted cutting), 
and had married without the knowledge 
of the judicious parent” (Charles Dickens, 
Great Expectations, 1860–61). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in the 16th century. It 
alludes to a representation of Time as hav-
ing a bald head with just a lock of hair at 
the front, so it can be seized as it arrives 
but not as it departs.
Variant of this proverb: take oppor-
tunity by the forelock.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
the mill cannot grind with the water 
that is past; seize the day; there’s no 
time like the present; time and tide wait 
for no man.
a tale never loses in the telling  People 
are inclined to exaggerate, and anecdotes, 
gossip, or lies are embroidered by the teller 
each time they are retold: A tale never loses 
in the telling—he is rumored to have inherited 
twenty million dollars, but if you knock a couple 
of zeros off the end of the fi gure, you will be a 
bit closer to the actual sum of money involved. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in its cur-
rent form in 1721, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: a tale grows 
better in the telling.
talk about the devil and his imps will 
appear  See speak of the devil and he 
always appears.
talk is cheap  It is easy to say that 
something can or will be done, but it 
take opportunity by the forelock
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   258 1/29/07   5:13:01 PM
259
takes money or effort to do it; often used 
when people make idle boasts or prom-
ises they are unlikely to keep: “‘What 
can you do?’ ‘Go out to Montana, just 
as soon as the weather is fi t, and relo-
cate the mine. . . .’ ‘Talk is cheap, but it 
takes money to pay for railroad tickets,’ 
went on Malone” (Horatio Alger, Joe the 
Hotel Boy, 1906). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in its current form in 1843 (T. 
C. Haliburton, Attaché), but the senti-
ment it expresses is of earlier origin.
Variants of this proverb: talk is 
cheap, but it takes money to buy land; 
talk is cheap, but it takes money to buy 
liquor.
talk of the devil and he’s sure to 
appear  See speak of the devil and he 
always appears.
tastes differ  Different people like dif-
ferent things: “‘I express my opinion,’ 
retorted Neelie, chafi ng under the satiri-
cally indulgent tone in which the govern-
ess addressed her. ‘It’s a matter of taste, 
Miss Gwilt; and tastes differ’” (Wilkie 
Collins, Armadale, 1866). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1803.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: every man to his taste; one man’s 
meat is another man’s poison; there’s 
no disputing about tastes.
tell it not in Gath  Be careful how much 
you tell your enemies: “The fact is—but 
tell it not in Gath—I was happier without 
them!” (Marie Corelli, God’s Good Man, 
1904). The proverb is biblical in origin, 
appearing at 2 Samuel 1:20, in which 
David hears of the death of Jonathan in 
battle with the Philistines: “Tell it not 
in Gath, publish it not in the streets of 
Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philis-
tines rejoice.”
tell not all you know, nor do all you 
can  It is good policy not to reveal the 
full extent of your knowledge or capa-
bilities: Sometimes it is wiser in business to 
tell not all you know, nor do all you can, but to 
keep something back for yourself. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1739 in Benjamin 
Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack.
tell the truth and shame the devil  It is 
always best to be honest, however great 
the temptation may be to lie: “I don’t like 
the whole change that’s come over you 
in the last year. I’m sorry if that hurts 
your feelings, but I’ve got to—tell the 
truth and shame the devil” (Thornton 
Wilder, Our Town, 1938). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1548. It occurs in 
Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, Part 1 (3:1): 
“And I can teach thee, coz, to shame 
the devil/By telling truth: tell truth and 
shame the devil.”
Variant of this proverb: speak the 
truth and shame the devil.
that government is best which governs 
least  The best form of government is 
one that allows people the greatest free-
dom: “I heartily accept the motto, ‘That 
government is best which governs least.’ 
. . . Carried out, it fi nally amounts to this, 
which also I believe—‘That government 
is best which governs not at all’” (Henry 
David Thoreau, Civil Disobedience, 1849). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1837, 
in John L. O’Sullivan’s introduction to 
The United States Magazine and Democratic 
Review: “The best government is that which 
governs least.” It is held to be one of the 
key principles of the Republican Party.
 that government is best which governs least
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   259 1/29/07   5:13:01 PM
260
them as asks, gits; them as don’t ask, 
don’t git  See ask, and it shall be given 
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and 
it shall be opened unto you.
there are as good fi sh in the sea as ever 
came out of it  See there are other fish 
in the sea.
there are lies, damned lies, and statis-
tics  Statistics can be used to create a 
misleading impression: “Statistically speak-
ing, this is one of the safest forms of travel.” 
“I don’t believe it. Have you never heard 
the saying ‘There are lies, damned lies, and 
statistics’?” The proverb is attributed to 
the British statesman Benjamin Disraeli 
(1804–81) in Mark Twain’s autobiogra-
phy: “There are three kinds of lies: lies, 
damned lies and statistics.”
there are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream  If one method 
fails, there are plenty more to choose 
from: Undeterred, we tried a more subtle 
approach—there are more ways of killing a 
cat than choking it with cream. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1855, in 
Charles Kingsley’s novel Westward Ho!, but 
its variant forms are of earlier origin.
Variants of this proverb: there are 
more ways of killing a dog than choking it 
with butter; there are more ways of kill-
ing a dog than hanging it.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: all roads lead to rome; there’s 
more than one way to skin a cat.
there are no birds in last year’s 
nest  Things are not as they were: That 
may well have been the case when you were in 
offi ce, but the circumstances are quite different 
now—there are no birds in last year’s nest, as 
they say. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1620, in a translation of Cervantes’ Don 
Quixote.
there are no gains without pains  See 
no pain, no gain.
there are none so blind as those who 
will not see  It is impossible to make 
people accept the evidence of their own 
eyes if they choose to ignore it or refuse 
to believe it: “‘None so blind as those that 
won’t see.’ . . . A single effort of the will 
was suffi cient to exclude from his view 
whatever he judged hostile to his immedi-
ate purpose” (Edward Fitzgerald, Polonius, 
1852). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1546 in the form “Who is so deaf, or so 
blind, as is he that willfully will neither 
hear nor see.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there are none so deaf as those who 
will not hear.
there are none so deaf as those who will 
not hear  You cannot communicate with 
people who stubbornly refuse to listen: 
I tried to warn her that her son was heading 
for trouble, but there are none so deaf as those 
who will not hear. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546, with different wording 
(see the preceding entry), but a French 
equivalent was in use 200 years earlier.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there are none so blind as those who 
will not see.
there are other fi sh in the sea  Plenty 
more people, things, opportunities, or 
options are available; often used to con-
sole somebody whose relationship with 
a boyfriend or girlfriend has ended: 
“There’s fi sh in the sea, no doubt of it, 
them as asks, gits; them as don’t ask, don’t git
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   260 1/29/07   5:13:01 PM
261
As good as ever came out of it” (W. S. 
Gilbert, Patience, 1881). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
c. 1573.
Variant of this proverb: there are 
as good fi sh in the sea as ever came out 
of it.
there are tricks in every trade  People 
in every occupation have their own spe-
cial—and often secret—ways of doing 
things that enable them to save time, 
effort, or money; often implying clever-
ness, craftiness, or deception: “‘Where 
are you staying?’ ‘Mrs. May’s boarding 
house.’ ‘I know her. What they tell is she 
fi lls you up with soup so you can’t eat 
much meat.’ ‘I guess there are tricks to 
every trade,’ said Adam” (John Steinbeck, 
East of Eden, 1952). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1632 in the form “Knavery 
in all trades.” It has given rise to the fi gu-
rative phrase the tricks of the trade.
there are two sides to every ques-
tion  Any issue can be looked at from 
two opposing viewpoints, both of which 
merit consideration: “Men of energy of 
character must have enemies: because 
there are two sides to every question, and 
. . . those who take the other will of course 
be hostile” (Thomas Jefferson, letter dated 
May 5, 1817). Of ancient origin, the 
proverb has been attributed to the Greek 
teacher Protagoras (c. 490–c. 420 b.c.). 
Other words may be used in place of ques-
tion, such as story, argument, coin, or fence.
there goes more to marriage than four 
bare legs in a bed  There is more to 
marriage tha n sex: The most successful mar-
riages are those where the husband and wife 
are intellectually as well as sexually compat-
ible—there goes more to marriage than four 
bare legs in a bed. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1549 in John Heywood’s Dia-
logue of Proverbs.
there’ll be sleeping enough in the 
grave  Life is too short to waste time 
having more sleep than you need: She was 
one of those hearty outdoor types who insist on 
waking everybody up at the crack of dawn with 
a cry of “Rise and shine! There’ll be sleeping 
enough in the grave.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1741, in Benjamin Franklin’s 
Poor Richard’s Almanack.
there must be a fi rst time for every-
thing  See there’s a first time for 
everything.
there’s a black sheep in every fl ock  In 
every family, community, organization, or 
profession there is at least one member 
who brings disgrace on the rest: “There 
are black sheep in nearly every large fam-
ily . . . and these two one-idea’d curs were 
ready to tear any one to death that should 
interfere with that miserable inheritance 
which was their thought by day and their 
dream by night” (Charles Reade, The Clois-
ter and the Hearth, 1861). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1816. Often reduced to 
the cliché a black sheep, or the black sheep of 
the family, it alludes to the undesirability 
of sheep with black wool that is diffi cult 
to dye.
Variant of this proverb: there’s a 
black sheep in every family.
there’s a fi rst time for everything  Ev-
erything must start somewhere, and the 
fact that something has not happened 
before does not mean that it will never 
happen; also used when somebody does 
 there’s a fi rst time for everything
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   261 1/29/07   5:13:01 PM
262
something that he or she has never done 
before: “It’s perfectly safe—we’ve been doing 
it this way for the past ten years and we’ve 
never had an accident.” “There’s a fi rst time for 
everything.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1792 in A. Hamilton’s Papers.
Variants of this proverb: there’s 
always a fi rst time; there must be a fi rst 
time for everything.
there’s a Jack for every Jill  See every 
jack has his jill.
there’s always a fi rst time  See there’s 
a first time for everything.
there’s always room at the top  Those 
who excel, or who are truly ambitious, 
will always succeed: It’s a competitive business, 
but there’s always room at the top. The proverb 
is attributed to the U.S. statesman Daniel 
Webster (1782–1852), who replied in 
this way to advise against joining the over-
crowded legal profession. It was popular-
ized in the mid-20th century by the British 
writer John Braine in his best-selling novel 
Room at the Top (1957) and its Academy 
Award–winning movie adaptation.
there’s an exception to every rule  No 
rule applies in every single case: This 
phenomenon, which appears to defy the laws of 
physics, demonstrates that there’s an exception to 
every rule. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1579 in the form “There is no rule so 
general that it admits not exception.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the exception proves the rule.
there’s a pot of gold at the end of 
the rainbow  Some things can never be 
achieved; used when people chase after 
ideals or ambitions that constantly elude 
them: There’s a pot of gold at the end of the 
rainbow, and in this case the pot of gold is the 
crime-free society that no politician will ever 
be able to deliver. The proverb alludes to 
the popular superstition, fi rst recorded 
in 1836, that a pot of gold is to be found 
at the place where a rainbow touches the 
ground.
there’s a remedy for everything except 
death  Death is fi nal, irremediable, and 
inevitable; also used to imply that all 
other problems have a solution: “There 
is a remedy for everything except Death 
. . . so the bitterness of this disappoint-
ment has long passed away” (Frederick 
Locker-Lampson, My Confi dences, 1896). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1573, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: there’s a 
remedy for all things but death.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
death defies the doctor.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: avoidance is the only remedy.
there’s a season and a time for every pur-
pose under the heaven  See to every-
thing there is a season.
there’s a sin of omission as well as of 
commission  There are times when fail-
ure to do what you should is as bad as doing 
what you should not do: As he did nothing to 
prevent the burglars from entering the building, 
he was deemed to have helped them—there’s a 
sin of omission as well as of commission.
there’s a skeleton in every closet  Every 
person, family, or organization has a shame-
ful secret: There’s a skeleton in every closet, 
and he was one of those journalists who special-
there’s a Jack for every Jill
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   262 1/29/07   5:13:01 PM
263
ize in fl inging open the closet doors of the rich 
and famous and exposing their skeletons to the 
public eye. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1845 (in William Thackeray’s Punch in 
the East) in the form “There is a skeleton 
in every house.” It is often reduced to the 
cliché a skeleton in the closet. 
Variant of this proverb: every family 
has a skeleton in the closet.
there’s a sucker born every minute  The 
world is full of gullible people: “‘There’s a 
sucker born every minute,’/P. T. Barnum 
declared,/And a con man is born every 
hour/To make sure no sucker is spared” 
(Wall Street Journal, 1994). The proverb is 
attributed to the U.S. showman Phineas 
T. Barnum (1810–91), but there is no 
evidence to support this attribution. It 
sometimes occurs in the allusive form 
“There’s one born every minute,” which is 
also applied more generally to fools.
there’s a tide in the affairs of man  In 
the ebb and fl ow of human existence, it 
is important to act at the most opportune 
or favorable time, and not to miss this 
moment when it comes: “‘There is a tide 
in the affairs of men/Which, taken at the 
fl ood,’—you know the rest,/And most of 
us have found it now and then;/At least we 
think so, though but few have guess’d/The 
moment, till too late to come again (Lord 
Byron, “Don Juan,” 1819). The proverb is 
a shortened and allusive form of a passage 
from Shakespeare’s play Julius Caesar (4:3): 
“There is a time in the affairs of men/
Which, taken at the fl ood, leads on to for-
tune; /Omitted, all the voyage of their life 
/Is bound in shallows and in miseries.”
there’s a time and place for every-
thing  Things should be done only at the 
appropriate time and in the appropriate 
place: There’s a time and place for everything, 
and this is neither the time nor the place to 
be cracking jokes like that! The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1509 in A. Barclay, Ship 
of Fools.
Variant of this proverb: there’s a 
time for everything.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
to everything there is a season.
there’s a time to speak and a time to be 
silent  Sometimes it is not appropriate to 
say anything: She could have told him where 
he had gone wrong, but there is a time to speak, 
and a time to be silent. The proverb is of bib-
lical origin, appearing at Ecclesiastes 3:7.
Variant of this proverb: there’s a 
time to wink as well as to see.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: silence is golden; speech is silver, 
but silence is golden; think before you 
speak; a word spoken is past recalling.
there’s good and bad in every-
thing  Nothing is totally good or bad: 
If you’re hoping to fi nd the perfect job, you’re 
heading for disappointment—there’s good and 
bad in everything.
there’s honor among thieves  Criminals 
will not hurt or betray their fellow crimi-
nals, thus treating one another with more 
respect than their victims: If it’s true that 
there’s honor among thieves, then why do the 
prisoners want to keep their personal pos-
sessions under lock and key? The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in the 
early 19th century, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: dog does not eat dog; hawks will 
not pick out hawks’ eyes.
 there’s honor among thieves
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   263 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
264
there’s luck in leisure  It is better not 
to act in haste; sometimes used to justify 
procrastination: They say there’s luck in 
leisure, so I decided to wait a little longer. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1683 
in G. Meriton’s Yorkshire Dialogue.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: delays are dangerous.
there’s luck in odd numbers  According 
to popular superstition, odd numbers are 
lucky; often said when somebody does 
something for the third, fi fth, or seventh 
time: “‘Now, Rory, leave off, sir: you’ll 
hug me no more;/That’s eight times 
to-day that you’ve kissed me before.’/
‘Then here goes another,’ says he, ‘to 
make sure,/For there’s luck in odd num-
bers,’ says Rory O’More” (Samuel Lover, 
“Rory O’More,” 1836). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in Shakespeare’s play The 
Merry Wives of Windsor (c. 1598). The 
sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
ancient origin, occurring in the writings 
of Virgil (70–19 b.c.): numero deus impare 
gaudet [the god delights in an uneven 
number].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the third time is the charm.
there’s many a good cock come out of 
a tattered bag  Do not be misled by 
external appearances—it is what is inside 
or what emerges from something that 
counts; also used to imply that people 
should not be judged by their parents, 
clothes, or background: The classes take 
place in a dilapidated building on the wrong 
side of town, but they have produced some of 
the fi nest musicians in the county, proving that 
there’s many a good cock come out of a tattered 
bag. First recorded in 1883, the proverb 
comes from the sport of cockfi ghting.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t judge a book by its cover.
there’s many a good tune played on an 
old fi ddle  Old people should not be 
dismissed as incapable: “Beyond a haricot 
vein in one of my legs I’m as young as ever 
I was. Old indeed! There’s many a good 
tune played on an old fi ddle” (Samuel 
Butler, The Way of All Flesh, 1903). The 
quotation is the fi rst recorded use of the 
proverb.
there’s many a slip between cup and 
lip  Many things can go wrong in the 
process of putting a plan into action; often 
used to warn against overconfi dence or 
overoptimism: We can’t be certain of success, 
and I won’t be happy until I have the document 
in my hand—there’s many a slip between cup 
and lip. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in En glish in 1539, but the sentiment it 
expresses dates back to ancient times. It 
is said to have its origin in Greek mythol-
ogy, in the story of a man who laughed at 
a prophecy that he would not live to drink 
the wine of his vineyard. As he raised the 
fi rst glass to his lips he was told that a boar 
was destroying his vines; he put down the 
glass and rushed out, only to be killed by 
the boar.
Variant of this proverb: there’s many 
a slip ’twixt cup and lip.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t count your chickens before 
they are hatched.
there’s many a true word said in jest  See 
many a true word is spoken in jest.
there’s measure in all things  Every-
thing should be done in moderation: 
“‘Why, carry out logically the theory you 
there’s luck in leisure
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   264 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
265
were advocating just now, and it follows 
that people may be killed.’ ‘Upon my 
word!’ cried Luzhin. ‘No, that’s not so,’ 
put in Zossimov. . . . ‘There’s a measure in 
all things,’ Luzhin went on superciliously. 
‘Economic ideas are not an incitement 
to murder, and one has but to suppose’” 
(Fyodor Dostoevsky, Crime and Punishment, 
1866). The proverb is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the writings of the Roman 
poet Horace (65–8 b.c.): “est modus in 
rebus [there is measure in things].” It was 
fi rst recorded in English in Chaucer’s Troi-
lus and Criseyde (c. 1385): “In every thyng, 
I woot, there lith mesure.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: enough is as good as a feast; 
enough is enough; moderation in all 
things.
there’s more than one way to skin a 
cat  There are many different ways of 
doing something: “The door’s locked! Now 
what are we going to do?” “There’s more than 
one way to skin a cat—let’s see if we can 
fi nd an open window.” The proverb is fi rst 
recorded in John Ray’s A Collection of Eng-
lish Proverbs (1670).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: all roads lead to rome; there 
are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream.
there’s no accounting for tastes  Ev-
erybody likes different things; often said 
disparagingly of another person’s choice, 
or predilection: “‘Shall we try another 
fi gure of the Lobster Quadrille?’ the Gry-
phon went on. ‘Or would you like the 
Mock Turtle to sing you a song?’ ‘Oh, a 
song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be 
so kind,’ Alice replied, so eagerly that the 
Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone, 
‘Hm! No accounting for tastes!’” (Lewis 
Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, 
1865). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1794.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: one man’s meat is another man’s 
poison.
there’s no disputing about tastes  There 
is no point in arguing about what is good 
or bad, since everybody likes different 
things: I tried to persuade her to choose a 
bolder color, but I soon realized I was wasting 
my breath. There’s no disputing about tastes, 
and she likes pastel shades best. Of ancient 
origin, the proverb is sometimes quoted 
in its Latin form, “De gustibus non est 
disputandum.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
tastes differ.
there’s no fool like an old fool  Foolish 
behavior in old people is often worse 
than that in the young: “‘You’re an old 
woman, Emily, and there’s no fool like an 
old fool. The man’s twenty years younger 
than you, and don’t fool yourself as 
to what he married you for. Money!” 
(Agatha Christie, The Mysterious Affair 
at Styles, 1920). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1546 in John Heywood’s 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: an old fool is 
the worst fool.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a fool at forty is a fool indeed.
there’s no great loss without some 
gain  There is often a small advantage 
to be gained from an unfortunate or 
unpleasant occurrence: My dreams of join-
ing the diplomatic corps had been dashed, but 
there’s no great loss without some gain, and I 
 there’s no great loss without some gain
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   265 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
266
had made a number of useful contacts along 
the way. The proverb dates from before 
1641.
there’s no little enemy  Do no under-
estimate your enemies, all of whom are 
capable of great harm: “To be friendly 
with every one is another matter; we must 
remember that there is no little enemy” 
(Sir John Lubbock, The Pleasures of Life, 
1887). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1659, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
ancient origin: compare Publilius Syrus 
(fi rst century b.c.), “Inimicum, quamvis 
humilem, docti est metuere [It is a wise man 
who fears an enemy, however humble].”
there’s no peace for the wicked  Life is 
full of interruptions and disturbances; said 
by those who are bothered in this way, joc-
ularly implying that they do not deserve 
to have any time to themselves: The phone 
hasn’t stopped ringing this evening—there’s no 
peace for the wicked! The proverb is of bibli-
cal origin: “There is no peace, saith the 
Lord, unto the wicked” (Isaiah 48:22).
Variant of this proverb: there’s no 
rest for the wicked.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s no rest for the weary.
there’s no place like home  Home is the 
place where people feel most comfortable 
and contented; often said by somebody 
on his or her return: “They . . . were only 
come now to stay a few weeks on account 
of their father’s death; but they did so 
like Marsh End and Morton, and all these 
moors and hills about. They had been in 
London, and many other grand towns; 
but they always said there was no place 
like home” (Charlotte Brontë, Jane Eyre, 
1847). The proverb is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the Greek poet Hesiod’s 
Works and Days (eighth century b.c.). 
It was popularized in the song “Home, 
Sweet Home” (1823) by J. H. Payne: 
“’Mid pleasures and palaces though we 
may roam,/Be it ever so humble, there’s 
no place like home.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: east, west, home’s best; home is 
home, be it ever so homely.
there’s no pleasure without pain  A 
happy or enjoyable experience is always 
accompanied by some sorrow or suffer-
ing: There’s no pleasure without pain, and 
the joy of our reunion was tempered by the 
knowledge that this was the last time the whole 
family would be together. The fi rst recorded 
use of this proverb is c. 1526: “Lyghtly 
there is no pleasure, but that vnto it some 
peyne is annexed” (Dicta Sapientum).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: no joy without annoy; there’s no 
rose without a thorn.
there’s no putting old heads on young 
shoulders  See you can’t put an old 
head on young shoulders.
there’s no rest for the weary  However 
hard you work, and however tired you 
are, there is always more to be done; said 
resignedly by somebody who suffers in 
this way: I’d just sat down, for the fi rst time 
all day, when my son called me into the kitchen 
to help him with a cake he was baking for his 
girlfriend—there’s no rest for the weary! The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in B. Graeme’s 
Murder of Some Importance (1931).
Variant of this proverb: there’s no 
rest for the wicked.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s no peace for the wicked.
there’s no little enemy
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   266 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
267
there’s no rest for the wicked  See 
there’s no peace for the wicked; 
there’s no rest for the weary.
there’s no rose without a thorn  All 
good, beautiful, or pleasurable things have 
some drawback or unpleasant aspect: “‘My 
pay is to be twenty-fi ve louis a month, a 
good table, good lodging, etc., etc. . . . Do 
you think it is worth the trouble?’ ‘There’s 
no rose without a thorn’” (Casanova, 
Memoirs, 1828–38). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1435, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of ancient origin.
Variant of this proverb: every rose 
has a thorn.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: no joy without alloy; there’s no 
pleasure without pain; you have to 
take the bitter with the sweet.
there’s no royal road to learning 
Knowledge and skills can only be 
acquired by hard work—there are no 
short cuts: There is no royal road to learn-
ing, but those who are prepared to put in 
the months of study required to master this 
subject will find their efforts well rewarded. 
The proverb was first recorded in its 
current form in 1824. It comes from 
an anecdote about the Greek math-
ematician Euclid (fl. 300 b.c.), who 
allegedly replied, “There is no royal 
road to geometry,” when asked by King 
Ptolemy I for an easier way to study 
the subject.
there’s no smoke without fi re  Rumors 
usually have a factual basis, although 
they may present a misleading or exag-
gerated version of the truth: The company 
has released a statement refuting the allega-
tions of fi nancial mismanagement made in 
yesterday’s newspapers, but there’s no smoke 
without fi re, and its stockholders remain con-
cerned. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1592, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin. Compare 
the 13th-century French proverb “Nul 
feu est sens fumee ne fumee sens feu [No fi re 
is without smoke, nor smoke without 
fi re].
Variant of this proverb: where there’s 
smoke, there’s fi re.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: common fame is seldom to blame; 
what everybody says must be true.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: much smoke, little fire.
there’s no such thing as a free lunch  Ev-
erything must be paid for, sooner or later, 
directly or indirectly: “Europeans are now 
learning some hard facts of life about 
socialized medicine: There’s no such thing 
as a free lunch” (Washington Times, 1996). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1966, 
in Robert Heinlein’s The Moon Is a Harsh 
Mistress. It is associated with the U.S. 
economist Milton Friedman (1912–  ), 
who popularized it.
Variant of this proverb: there’s no 
such thing as a free ride.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you don’t get something for nothing.
there’s no such thing as bad weather, 
only the wrong clothes  Any weather is 
tolerable if you are suitably dressed for it: 
“There’s no such thing as bad weather, only the 
wrong clothes,” she said as she put on her slicker, 
boots, and sou’wester and set off in the pour-
ing rain for her daily walk with the dogs. The 
proverb is of comparatively recent origin, 
and was fi rst recorded in the Washington 
Post (Feb. 15, 1980).
 there’s no such thing as bad weather, only the wrong clothes
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   267 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
268
Variant of this proverb: there’s no such 
thing as bad weather, only bad clothes.
there’s nothing constant but inconstancy 
There will always be people and things 
that are unreliable or changeable: There’s 
nothing constant but inconstancy, and even our 
best friends may turn against us. The proverb 
is recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
there’s nothing lost by civility  Polite-
ness does no harm, and may do a lot of 
good: You could at least have apologized—
there’s nothing lost by civility.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
civility costs nothing.
there’s nothing new under the sun  What 
is thought to be a novelty is often shown 
to be nothing more than a revival or 
reintroduction of an old idea; also used 
as a comment on the changeless nature 
of things: “‘They’re after something quite 
new—something that’s never been heard 
of before.’ ‘My dear fellow! There is noth-
ing new under the sun’” (George Orwell, 
Coming up for Air, 1939). The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “The thing that hath 
been, it is that which shall be; and that 
which is done is that which shall be done: 
and there is no new thing under the sun” 
(Ecclesiastes 1:9).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: everything old is new again; the 
more things change, the more they 
stay the same.
there’s nothing so good for the inside of 
a man as the outside of a horse  Riding 
is a healthy pastime: “The Squire will wind 
up . . . with an apocryphal saying which he 
attributes to Lord Palmerston—‘There’s 
nothing so good for the inside of a man as 
the outside of a horse’” (G. W. E. Russell, 
Social Silhouettes, 1906). The quotation is 
the fi rst recorded use of the proverb.
there’s no time like the present  Now 
is the best time to do something; used 
as encouragement to act without delay: 
“We must clear out the attic one of these days.” 
“There’s no time like the present—let’s make a 
start on it straight away.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in this form in 1696, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: take time by the forelock; pro-
crastination is the thief of time.
there’s nowt so queer as folk  People 
are uniquely unpredictable: He shook his 
head when he heard the news and observed 
“There’s nowt so queer as folk.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1905 in the English 
Dialect Dictionary.
there’s one law for the rich and another 
for the poor  See one law for the rich 
and another for the poor.
there’s reason in all things  Everything is 
logical or done for a purpose: They say there’s 
reason in all things, but I have yet to understand 
the reason for this drastic change of plan. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1602 in John 
Marston’s Antonio and Mellida.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every why hath its wherfore.
there’s safety in numbers  It is preferable 
or advisable to face a dangerous or unpleas-
ant situation in the company of others; also 
used more generally, to imply that many is 
better than a few, or to justify siding with 
the majority: We always walk home from the 
there’s nothing constant but inconstancy
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   268 1/29/07   5:13:02 PM
269
club together, on the principle that there’s safety 
in numbers. The proverb is of biblical origin: 
“Where no counsel is, the people fall: but 
in the multitude of counselors there is 
safety” (Proverbs 11:14).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every why has its wherefore.
there’s truth in wine  What people say 
when they are drunk is usually true: There 
is truth in wine, and she had drunk the best part 
of a bottle of champagne, so I felt inclined to 
believe her. Of ancient origin, the proverb is 
often used in its Latin form, “In vino veritas,” 
as in the following quotation from Anthony 
Trollope’s novel Phineas Redux (1873): “But 
he was fl ushed with much wine, and he 
was a man whose arrogance in that con-
dition was apt to become extreme. ‘In 
vino veritas!’ The sober devil can hide his 
cloven hoof; but when the devil drinks he 
loses his cunning and grows honest.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
alcohol will preserve anything but 
a secret; drunkenness reveals what 
soberness conceals.
Variant of this proverb: in wine there 
is truth.
they also serve who only stand and 
wait  You can be often be helpful without 
actively doing anything; also used to com-
mend or encourage patience and endur-
ance: “This man’s life of patient suffering 
was not in vain, but a benediction to many 
who came in contact with it. ‘Those also 
serve who only stand and wait’” (Philip 
Schaff, History of the Christian Church, 1883–
1893). The proverb comes from John Mil-
ton’s poem “On His Blindness” (c. 1650).
they that dance must pay the piper 
Those who gain pleasure or benefi t from 
something must be prepared to bear 
the costs or suffer the consequences: 
He smoked and drank himself into an early 
grave—they that dance must pay the piper. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1638 
(J. Taylor, Taylor’s Feast) in the form “Those 
that dance must pay the Musicke.”
Variants of this proverb: he who 
dances must pay the fi ddler; those who 
dance must pay the fi ddler.
they that live longest see most  Older 
people have more experience of life: 
Many of her younger neighbors used to go 
to my grandmother for advice, on the basis 
of the saying “They that live longest see 
most.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1620, in a translation of 
Cervantes’s Don Quixote, but there is 
evidence of a French version in the early 
14th century.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
don’t teach your grandmother to 
suck eggs.
they that sow the wind shall reap the 
whirlwind  People who provoke trouble 
or violence—or behave in a reckless man-
ner—will suffer far worse consequences: 
“. . . the indiscriminate profusion that 
would glut avarice, or supply prodigal-
ity, neither does good, nor is rewarded 
by gratitude. It is sowing the wind to 
reap the whirlwind” (Sir Walter Scott, 
The Black Dwarf, 1816). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “For they have sown the 
wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind” 
(Hosea 8:7).
Variant of this proverb: sow the wind 
and reap the whirlwind.
a thing of beauty is a joy forever  Beau-
tiful things bring lasting pleasure; often used 
 a thing of beauty is a joy forever
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   269 1/29/07   5:13:03 PM
270
to imply that the memory of  something 
beautiful stays with you for a long time 
afterward: “I wished for a picture of her. A 
Madonna, whose face was a portrait of that 
beautiful Nazareth girl, would be a ‘thing 
of beauty’ and ‘a joy forever’” (Mark Twain, 
The Innocents Abroad, 1869). The proverb 
comes from John Keats’s poem “Endymion” 
(1818): “A thing of beauty is a joy for ever:/
Its loveliness increases; it will never/Pass 
into nothingness.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: beauty is but a blossom.
things come in threes  According to 
popular superstition, two similar occur-
rences—bad or good—are inevitably fol-
lowed by a third: I fell down the steps this 
morning and trapped my fi nger in the door 
this afternoon, so if things come in threes—as 
people say they do—I’m in for another acci-
dent before long. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1927.
Variants of this proverb: all good 
things come in threes; all bad things come 
in threes.
things past cannot be recalled  It is 
too late for regret after something is done; 
sometimes used to advise caution: Many 
of us would do things differently if we had our 
lives to live over again, but things past cannot 
be recalled. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in the 15th century, but there 
is evidence of a French version 100 years 
earlier.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what’s done cannot be undone.
a thing you don’t want is dear at any 
price  Do not be tempted to buy some-
thing you do not need just because it is 
cheap: When my mother came back from the 
sale laden with so-called bargains, I reminded 
her of the saying “A thing you don’t want is 
dear at any price.”
think all you speak, but speak not all you 
think  Do not say anything that you do 
not believe, but never say everything that 
is in your mind: I’m not asking you to lie, I’m 
just suggesting that it would be not be tactful 
to tell the whole truth—think all you speak, 
but speak not all you think. The proverb is 
recorded as a regional expression in the 
United States.
think before you speak  Never express 
an opinion, make a remark, or answer a 
question until you have considered the 
possible effects of what you are going 
to say; also used to imply that careful 
thought beforehand leads to more elo-
quent speech: “A long article on airport-
security tips for passengers ends with the 
advice: ‘Think before you speak. Casual 
joking remarks may not be viewed as such 
by secret agents’” (Boston Globe, 1990). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1557 in 
the form “Think well and you will speak 
well.”
Variants of this proverb: fi rst think, 
and then speak; think fi rst and speak after-
ward; think twice before you speak once.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: think much, speak little, and write 
less; a word spoken is past recalling.
thinking is very far from knowing 
Opinion and conjecture are not the 
same as knowledge and certainty: “I 
think this is the right road.” “Thinking is 
very far from knowing—let’s look at the 
map!” The proverb was first recorded in 
1706 in J. Stevens, A New Spanish and 
English Dictionary.
things come in threes
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   270 1/29/07   5:13:03 PM
271
think much, speak little, and write less 
It is best to think long and hard about 
something before expressing any thoughts 
about it. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1430 in John Lydate’s Minor Poems in the 
form: “Take no quarelle, thynk mekyl and 
say nought.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
think before you speak.
think twice before you speak once  See 
think before you speak.
the third time is the charm  According 
to popular superstition, success will come 
at the third attempt: After two aborted mis-
sions, N.A.S.A. is hoping that the third time is 
the charm. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1721 (James Kelly, Scottish Proverbs), 
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
Variants of this proverb: third time 
lucky; the third time pays for all.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: if at first you don’t succeed, 
try, try again; there’s luck in odd 
numbers.
this, too, shall pass  Do not despair—an 
unpleasant situation or a diffi cult period 
will not last forever: When things were going 
badly for me, in the early part of my career, my 
father consoled me with the saying “This, too, 
shall pass.” He was right, of course, and soon 
the bad times were nothing more than a fading 
memory. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1852. In a speech in 1859, Abraham Lin-
coln told a story about its origin: “It is said 
an Eastern monarch once charged his wise 
men to invent him a sentence . . . which 
should be true and appropriate in all times 
and situations. They presented him the 
words: ‘And this, too, shall pass away.’” A 
similar anecdote attributes the proverb to 
King Solomon.
Variant of this proverb: all things 
will pass.
those who can, do; those who can’t, 
teach  People who are incapable of put-
ting their knowledge and skills to practi-
cal use go into education: He graduated 
from law school in 1995 and went back there 
as a lecturer two years later, prompting his 
students to remark, “Those who can, do; those 
who can’t, teach.” The proverb comes from 
George Bernard Shaw’s Man and Superman 
(1903): “He who can does. He who can-
not, teaches.” Other words may be substi-
tuted for teach, as in “Those who can, do; 
those who can’t, attend conferences.”
those who cannot remember the past 
are condemned to repeat it  Those who 
forget, are ignorant of, or fail to learn 
from the mistakes of earlier generations 
are likely to make the same mistakes 
themselves: It is to be hoped that the study 
of modern history in our schools and colleges 
will prevent a recurrence of horrors such as the 
Holocaust of World War II—those who cannot 
remember the past are condemned to repeat it. 
In its current form, the proverb comes 
from George Santayana’s The Life of Reason 
(1905–06). The sentiment it expresses, 
however, is of ancient origin.
those who dance must pay the fi d-
dler  See they that dance must pay 
the piper.
those who hide can fi nd  The person 
who fi nds something is often the person 
who hid it in the fi rst place: The speed with 
which the discovery was made aroused suspi-
cions that the police had planted the drugs on 
 those who hide can fi nd
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   271 1/29/07   5:13:03 PM
272
the premises—those who hide can fi nd. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1400 in 
Seven Sages of Rome.
those who know don’t speak; those who 
speak don’t know  Those who talk the 
most volubly are usually those who know 
the least about the subject in question: 
The more you say, the more you show your 
ignorance—have you never heard the proverb 
“Those who know don’t speak and those who 
speak don’t know”? Of ancient Chinese 
origin, the proverb was fi rst recorded in 
English in 1948.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
who knows most, speaks least.
those who play at bowls must look out 
for rubbers  It is foolish to embark on 
or participate in an enterprise without 
being aware of or taking account of the 
problems you may encounter: “‘And how 
if it fails?’ said Darsie. ‘Thereafter as it 
may be . . . those who play at bowls must 
meet with rubbers’” (Sir Walter Scott, 
Redgauntlet, 1824). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1762. The word rubbers (or 
rubs) refers to the unevenness of the 
ground on which the game of bowls (or 
lawn bowling) is played.
those who please everybody please 
nobody  See you can’t please every-
body.
thought is free  Anybody may think 
whatever he or she likes: “‘Ah, your 
Ursel was a jewel of worth,’ said the girl 
earnestly. ‘Would she were here.’ ‘Instead 
of her that is here?’ ‘I say not that,’ and 
she blushed a little. ‘You do but think 
it.’ ‘Thought is free’” (Charles Reade, 
The Cloister and the Hearth, 1861). First 
recorded c. 1390, the proverb occurs 
in Shakespeare’s play Twelfth Night (1:3; 
1601): “‘Fair lady, do you think you have 
fools in hand?’ ‘Now, sir, thought is free.’”
the thread breaks where it is weakest  A 
weak point in a thread or anything else is 
likely to be the point where the whole 
thing fails: He insisted upon changes in lower 
management, arguing that the thread breaks 
where it is weakest. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1640 in George Herbert’s 
Outlandish Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a chain is no stronger than its weak-
est link.
threatened men live long  Threats are 
often not carried out, and people who have 
been warned are on their guard and there-
fore in less danger than others; sometimes 
said in defi ant response to a threat or warn-
ing: A succession of doctors had told him that if 
he didn’t change his lifestyle, he wouldn’t live to 
see his grandchildren, but threatened folks live 
long, and he proved them all wrong. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in English in 1534 
(Lady E. Wheathell, in M. St. C. Byrne, 
Lisle Letters), but with the implication that 
it was already an old saying, and a French 
equivalent was in use 200 years earlier.
Variant of this proverb: threatened 
folks live the longest.
the three doctors Diet, Quiet, and Tem-
perance are the best physicians  See 
the best doctors are dr. diet, dr. 
quiet, and dr. merryman.
three may keep a secret, if two of them 
are dead  It is impossible for two or 
more people to keep a secret: “Don’t worry, 
your secret is safe with us.” “I wish I could 
those who know don’t speak; those who speak don’t know
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   272 1/29/07   5:13:03 PM
273
believe you, but I’ve heard it said that three 
may keep a secret only if two of them are dead.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in 
John Heywood, Dialogue of Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: two can keep 
a secret if one is dead.
three moves are as bad as a fi re  The 
loss, damage, and stress involved in mov-
ing house three times is equivalent to that 
caused by a fi re: I can well believe that three 
moves are as bad as a fi re—we have already 
moved house twice since we were married, and 
it was a major upheaval each time, so I hope 
we never have to do it again. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1758, in Benjamin 
Franklin’s Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Variant of this proverb: moving three 
times is as bad as a fi re.
three things are not to be trusted: a 
cow’s horn, a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s 
hoof  A cow is likely to gore you, a 
dog to bite you, and a horse to kick you, 
so treat all three with respect and cau-
tion: Given that three things are not to be 
trusted—a cow’s hoof, a dog’s tooth, and a 
horse’s hoof—is it any surprise that people 
prefer to live in cities and keep cats? The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in English c. 1383, 
with woman’s faith as the third object of 
distrust, replacing a cow’s horn. Other 
substitutes include women’s protestations, an 
Englishman’s laugh, and a baby’s bottom, the 
last of these occurring in a 13th-century 
French version of the proverb.
three times a bridesmaid, never a 
bride  See always a bridesmaid, never 
a bride.
thrift is a great revenue  Saving and 
frugality lead to fi nancial gain: “Thrift 
. . . is not only a great virtue but also 
‘a great revenue’” (London Times, 1930). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, with 
different wording, in 1659, but the sen-
timent it expresses is of ancient origin. 
Compare Cicero (106–43 b.c.): “Non 
intelligunt homines quam magnum vectigal 
sit parsimonia [Men do no realize how 
great a revenue thrift is].”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a penny saved is a penny earned; 
saving is getting.
throw dirt enough, and some will 
stick  A reputation that is constantly 
attacked cannot remain undamaged—if 
false accusations or defamatory remarks 
are repeated often enough, people will 
begin to believe them: “Whatever harm 
a . . . venomous tongue could do them, 
he took care should be done. Only throw 
dirt enough and some of it is sure to stick” 
(Thomas Hughes, Tom Brown’s Schooldays, 
1857). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1656 in Trepan.
Variant of this proverb: fl ing dirt 
enough, and some will stick.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
give a dog a bad name and hang him.
throw out a sprat to catch a mackerel 
It is worth making a small sacrifi ce to 
gain something of much greater value: 
Loss leaders are goods offered for sale at below 
cost price to attract customers who will, it is 
hoped, make further purchases in the store—a 
modern illustration of the saying “Throw out 
a sprat to catch a mackerel.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1810 in John Poole, 
Hamlet Travestied.
Variants of this proverb: you must 
lose a fl y to catch a trout; set a sprat to 
catch a mackerel.
 throw out a sprat to catch a mackerel
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   273 1/29/07   5:13:03 PM
274
Thursday’s child has far to go  Chil-
dren born on a Thursday are supposed 
to be destined to travel: We were not sur-
prised when Megan announced her intention 
to backpack around the world before going 
to college—she was born on a Thursday, and 
everybody knows that Thursday’s child has far 
to go! The proverb is the fourth line of a 
traditional rhyme. See entries at the days 
of the week for other proverbs from this 
rhyme.
time alone will tell  See time will tell.
time and tide wait for no man  Nobody 
can afford to delay or be delayed: “‘Annie, 
my dear,’ said he, looking at his watch, and 
fi lling his glass, ‘it is past your cousin Jack’s 
time, and we must not detain him, since 
time and tide—both concerned in this 
case—wait for no man’” (Charles Dickens, 
David Copperfi eld, 1850). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1592 in a form referring 
to both time and tide, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
take time by the forelock.
time ends all things  Everything must 
ultimately come to an end—nothing lasts 
forever: Time ends all things, and the feuding 
families fi nally agreed to bury their differences. 
The proverb is fi rst recorded in N. Ames’s 
Almanacs (1786).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
everything has an end.
time fl ies  Time sometimes seems to 
pass with surprising rapidity: “‘Time fl ies,’ 
said Dick. ‘George Thorne will be free 
before long, and he’ll be coming out. I 
wonder if he’ll stay here or try to take 
Mercedes away?’ ” (Zane Grey, Desert Gold, 
1913). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1639, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of ancient origin. It is some-
times found in its Latin form, “Tempus 
fugit.” Extended forms of the proverb 
include “Time fl ies when you’re having 
fun” and “Time fl ies when you’re enjoying 
yourself,” often used ironically.
time hangs heavy on idle hands  Time 
seems to pass more slowly when we have 
little or nothing to do: Business is sluggish 
at the moment, and the working day sometimes 
seems interminable—time hangs heavy on 
idle hands. The proverb is recorded as a 
regional expression in the United States.
time is a great healer  Grief, shock, 
wounded feelings, and so on will fade with 
time: She thought she would never get over the 
death of her husband, but time is a great healer. 
The proverb is of ancient origin, occurring 
in the writings of the Greek poet and dra-
matist Menander (c. 342–292 b.c.): “time 
is the healer of all necessary evils.”
Variants of this proverb: time heals 
all wounds; time will heal.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: patience is a remedy for every 
sorrow; time works wonders.
time is money   Nobody can afford to 
waste time that could be spent earning 
money: “I’m only asking for ten minutes of 
your time—it won’t cost you anything.” “Yes it 
will—I’m self-employed, and time is money!” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in this 
form in 1748, in Benjamin Franklin’s Advice 
to a Young Tradesman, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
time is the rider that breaks youth 
Young people become less wild and more 
Thursday’s child has far to go
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   274 1/29/07   5:13:04 PM
275
sensible with age: Most troublesome teenag-
ers develop into responsible adults—time is 
the rider that breaks youth. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1640, in George 
Herbert’s Outlandish Proverbs.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: wanton kittens make sober cats; 
with age comes wisdom.
time lost cannot be recalled  Time 
wasted cannot be reclaimed: “And time 
lost may well be repented, but never 
recalled” (John Lyly, Euphues and his 
England, 1580). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1385 in Geoffrey Chaucer’s 
Troilus and Criseyde.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
lose an hour in the morning, chase it 
all day; yesterday will not be called 
again.
times change, and we with time  Cus-
toms, values, and circumstances are 
constantly changing, and we must adapt 
ourselves accordingly: When I fi rst started 
work, nobody addressed their superiors or 
inferiors by their fi rst names. But times change, 
and we with time—I don’t even know the sur-
names of some of the people I work with today. 
The proverb is of Latin origin: “Tempora 
mutantur nos et mutamur in illis [Times are 
changing and we with them].” It is often 
shortened to “Times change.”
Variant of this proverb: times change, 
and we with them.
time will heal  See time is a great 
healer.
time will tell  Some things can only be 
judged or known after the passage of 
time: I hope I have made the right decision, 
but only time will tell. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in its current form in the 
20th century, earlier forms being “Time 
will show,” “Time reveals all things,” and 
“Time discloses all things.” The sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin, occurring 
in the writings of the Greek poet and dra-
matist Menander (c. 342–292 b.c.): “time 
brings the truth to light.”
Variants of this proverb: time alone 
will tell; only time will tell.
time works wonders  Great things can 
be achieved in the course of time: I 
thought she would never learn the job, but time 
works wonders, and now she is one of our best 
employees. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1588 in A. Marten’s Exhortation to 
Defend Country.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
time is a great healer.
timing is everything  It is important to 
choose the right time to do something: 
Timing is everything, and this is probably not 
the best moment to reopen the public debate 
about capital punishment. The proverb 
comes from the Greek poet Hesiod’s 
Works and Days (eighth century b.c.): 
“Observe due measure, for right timing is 
in all things the most important factor.”
’tis better to have loved and lost, than 
never to have loved at all  It is better to 
have experienced the joy of love, even if it 
ends in sorrow, than never to have had that 
experience: I was devastated when my daugh-
ter died, but I cherish all my happy memories of 
her, and consider myself more blessed than some 
of my childless friends—’tis better to have loved 
and lost, than never to have loved at all. In its 
current form, the proverb comes from 
Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s poem “In Memo-
riam” (1850), but a similar sentiment 
 ’tis better to have loved and lost, than never to have loved at all
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   275 1/29/07   5:13:04 PM
276
was expressed by William Congreve 150 
years earlier in his play The Way of the World 
(1700): “Say what you will, ’tis better to 
be left, than never to have been loved.”
today is yesterday’s tomorrow  You can-
not go on putting things off, because the 
future becomes the present: “I’ll quit smok-
ing tomorrow.” “You’ve said that before. Today 
is yesterday’s tomorrow, so why not quit now?” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1745 in 
Edward Young’s Night Thoughts.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never put off until tomorrow what 
you can do today.
today you, tomorrow me  What happens 
to one person one day could happen to 
another person the next day: “‘Comrade,’ 
I say to the dead man, but I say it calmly, 
‘Today you, tomorrow me’” (Erich Maria 
Remarque, All Quiet on the Western Front, 
1929). The proverb is of Latin origin: 
“Hodie mihi, cras tibi [Today it is my turn, 
tomorrow yours].”
Variant of this proverb: I today, you 
tomorrow.
to each his own  Everybody has his or 
her own tastes and idiosyncrasies: Standing 
in the rain watching cars drive around a race-
track all afternoon is not my idea of fun, but to 
each his own. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1713 in Wise, Churches Quarrel Espoused.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
every man to his taste.
to err is human, to forgive divine  We 
all make mistakes, but not everybody 
is tolerant of the mistakes of others; 
sometimes used to ask for forgiveness, 
implying that it would be a magnanimous 
gesture: “The modern moralist pardons 
everything, because he is not certain of 
anything, except that to err is human” 
(London Times Literary Supplement, 1908). 
The fi rst part of the proverb sometimes 
stands alone, as in the quotation, and is 
also found in the Latin form “Humanum 
est errare.” In its current form, the proverb 
comes from Alexander Pope’s Essay on 
Criticism (1711). Earlier versions do not 
mention forgiveness, but add that “to 
repent is divine” or “to persevere is dia-
bolical.” A modern facetious variant is “To 
err is human, but to really foul things up 
requires a computer.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: homer sometimes nods; nobody is 
infallible.
to everything there is a season  Ev-
erything has its own appropriate time: 
Don’t be too impatient to start a family—to 
everything there is a season. The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “To everything there is a 
season, and a time to every purpose under 
the heaven” (Ecclesiastes 3:1). The passage 
goes on to list numerous examples: “A 
time to be born, and a time to die; . . . A 
time to kill, and a time to heal; . . . A time 
to weep, and a time to laugh; . . . A time 
to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, 
and a time of peace.”
Variant of this proverb: there’s a sea-
son and a time for every purpose under 
the heaven.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s a time and place for every-
thing.
to forget a wrong is the best revenge  See 
the best way to get even is to forget.
to know all is to forgive all  The better 
you understand somebody’s motives, the 
today is yesterday’s tomorrow
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   276 1/29/07   5:13:04 PM
277
more likely you are to pardon him or her: 
If only you would let me explain, you would see 
things in a different light—to know all is to 
forgive all. First recorded in English in the 
mid-20th century, the proverb may be of 
French origin.
tomorrow is another day  Don’t worry 
about what has happened today—things 
may improve tomorrow; also used with 
reference to making a fresh start: The search 
party has just returned, somewhat dispirited, 
but tomorrow is another day and they haven’t 
given up hope of fi nding the child alive. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, in its variant 
form, c. 1527. It was popularized as the 
closing line of Margaret Mitchell’s novel 
Gone with the Wind (1936): “Tomorrow, I’ll 
think of some way to get him back. After 
all, tomorrow is another day.”
Variant of this proverb: tomorrow 
is a new day.
tomorrow never comes  If you keep 
putting something off until tomorrow, it 
will never get done: “To-morrow, every 
Fault is to be amended; but that To-mor-
row never comes” (Benjamin Franklin, 
Poor Richard’s Almanack, 1756). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, in 1523 in Lord Berners’s 
Froissart.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one of these days is none of these 
days.
the tongue always returns to the sore 
tooth  People cannot help thinking or 
talking about what is bothering them 
most at a particular time: I tried to bury 
myself in my work, but my mind kept going back 
to the argument I’d had with my husband the 
day before—the tongue always returns to the 
sore tooth. The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, in 1586.
Variant of this proverb: the tongue 
ever turns to the aching tooth.
the tongue is not steel, but it cuts 
Words can cause as much pain and dam-
age as an edged tool or weapon: The 
tongue is not steel, but it cuts, and the scars 
left by her cruel words took many months to 
heal. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1640, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverbs expressing opposite mean-
ing: hard words break no bones; sticks 
and stones may break my bones, but 
names will never hurt me.
too many chiefs and not enough Indians 
There are too many people giving orders 
and not enough following them, or too 
many people in charge and not enough to 
do the work: It was a classic case of too many 
chiefs and not enough Indians, with a top-heavy 
management structure and an overstretched 
labor force. The proverb is thought to have 
originated in Australia about 1940.
Variants of this proverb: all chiefs 
and no Indians; too many chiefs and not 
enough braves.
too many cooks spoil the broth  Too 
many people trying to help can be a 
hindrance; also used of too many people 
working on the same project, often pull-
ing in different directions: Some of the 
worst movies I’ve ever seen have a whole string 
of screenwriters in the credits, proving that too 
many cooks spoil the broth. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1575 in the form “The 
more cooks the worse potage.” Other 
words may be substituted for broth, such 
as brew, stew, or pie.
 too many cooks spoil the broth
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   277 1/29/07   5:13:04 PM
278
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: many hands make light work.
too much of a good thing is worse than 
none at all  See you can have too 
much of a good thing.
toot your own horn lest the same be 
never tooted  Sing your own praises, in 
case nobody else does: I think modesty is 
highly overrated as a virtue—my motto is “Toot 
your own horn lest the same be never tooted.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1776 in 
Warren-Adams Letters.
Variant of this proverb: if you don’t 
toot your own horn, nobody else will.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: self-praise is no recommendation.
to the pure all things are pure  Virtuous 
people tend to be unaware of the wicked-
ness or evil that is around them; sometimes 
used to imply naivety: To the pure all things 
are pure, and it never occurred to her that he 
might have an ulterior motive in asking to see the 
picture that hung over her bed. The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “Unto the pure all things 
are pure: but unto them that are defi led and 
unbelieving is nothing pure” (Titus 1:15).
to the victor belong the spoils  The 
winner of a contest or battle gets every-
thing that goes with victory: The winner of 
the championship gets a lot more than a tro-
phy—sponsorship deals, celebrity status—to 
the victor belong the spoils. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1832, in a speech made 
by Senator William L. Marcy of New 
York. F. Scott Fitzgerald turned it around 
in his novel The Beautiful and Damned 
(1922): “The victor belongs to the spoils.”
touch wood  If nothing goes wrong, every-
thing will turn out satisfactorily: I expect the 
delivery to arrive in the morning, touch wood. 
This proverbial charm was fi rst recorded in 
1805 in R. Anderson’s Ballads in Cumberland 
Dialect but may be much older. It refers to 
the ancient superstition (possibly rooted in 
pagan tree worship) that it is lucky to touch 
wood when you make a wish—and many 
people even today will seek to touch a piece 
of nearby wood as they say the charm.
Variant of this proverb: knock on 
wood; touch wood, it’s sure to come 
good.
trade follows the fl ag  One nation may 
colonize another for commercial pur-
poses: “The removal of a million poor 
creatures to Canada and the establishment 
of them there . . . would probably have 
turned out . . . a profi table investment. 
Trade follows the fl ag” (J. A. Froude, 
Fraser’s Magazine, 1870). The quotation is 
the fi rst recorded use of the proverb.
travel broadens the mind  People 
become more broad-minded and knowl-
edgeable by visiting other countries and 
learning about the customs, culture, and 
lifestyle of those who live there: “He 
may be a trifl e cracked . . . but that’s 
only because his travels have been too 
much for his intellect. They say travel 
broadens the mind; but you must have the 
mind” (G. K. Chesterton, The Poet and the 
Lunatics, 1929). The quotation is the fi rst 
recorded use of the proverb.
travel east and travel west, a man’s own 
home is still the best  See east, west, 
home’s best.
a traveler may lie with authority  People 
who have traveled may boast of their expe-
riences without fear of contradiction: No 
too much of a good thing is worse than none at all
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   278 1/29/07   5:13:04 PM
279
one believed the tale the stranger was spinning, 
but a traveller may lie with authority and no one 
could prove he was talking through the top of his 
hat. The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1362 
in William Langland’s Piers Plowman.
Variant of this proverb: soldiers and 
travelers may lie in authority.
the tree is known by its fruit  Peo-
ple should judged by what they do or 
produce—specifi cally, by their chil-
dren—rather than by fi rst impressions 
or outward appearance: “If then the tree 
may be known by the fruit, as the fruit 
by the tree, then, peremptorily I speak it, 
there is virtue in that Falstaff ” (William 
Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, 1597–98). 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Either 
make the tree good, and his fruit good; or 
else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit 
corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruit” 
(Matthew 12:33).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
handsome is as handsome does.
trifl es make perfection, and perfection is 
no trifl e  Perfection is a great thing, but 
not easy to achieve, and attention to detail 
is of the utmost importance: She kept going 
back over her work, changing a comma here and 
a word there, until she was completely satisfi ed. 
It was a tiresome exercise, but trifl es make perfec-
tion, and perfection is no trifl e. The proverb is 
attributed to the Italian artist Michelangelo 
(1475–1564), who is said to have made 
this remark to a friend after spending 
several days putting almost imperceptible 
fi nishing touches to a sculpture.
a trouble shared is a trouble halved  It 
often helps to discuss your problems with 
somebody else: Advice columnists are inun-
dated with letters from those how believe that a 
trouble shared is a trouble halved. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1931 in Dorothy 
L. Sayers’s Five Red Herrings.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
misery loves company.
troubles never come singly  See misfor-
tunes never come singly.
true blue will never stain  Persons of 
real integrity can never be corrupted. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1630 in the 
Roxburghe Ballads: “You know true blew 
will never stain.” One explanation of the 
proverb refers to the blue dye for which 
the city of Coventry, England, was known 
(and by which residents of the city might 
recognize each other), while another 
refers to the blue aprons of butchers, 
the dark color of which served to make 
bloodstains less obvious. There may also 
be a reference to the color blue as worn 
by the incorruptible Virgin Mary.
trust everybody, but cut the cards  Have 
faith in the honesty and integrity of those 
around you, but remain on your guard 
and take precautions in case you are 
wrong: I have no reason to doubt his word, 
but I want to check out the story before tak-
ing any further action—trust everybody, but 
cut the cards. First recorded in English in 
1900, the proverb is of Russian origin: 
“Trust, but verify.” It was popularized 
by President Ronald Reagan in the late 
1980s.
trust in God and keep your powder 
dry  See put your trust in god, and 
keep your powder dry.
trust not a new friend nor an old enemy 
It is foolish to trust either a friend of short 
 trust not a new friend nor an old enemy
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   279 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
280
standing or someone else who may harbor 
hostile feelings: She realized too late the 
truth of the old saw that you should never trust 
a new friend nor an old enemy. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in a ballad of 1450.
Variant of this proverb: trust not the 
praise of a friend nor the contempt of an 
enemy.
trust not one night’s ice  Do not rely 
upon something that has yet to be tried 
and tested: The general declined the offer of 
a royal audience, privately telling his advisers 
that he had learnt not to trust one night’s ice. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1651 in 
George Herbert’s Outlandish Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
first try and then trust.
trust not the praise of a friend nor the 
contempt of an enemy  See trust not a 
new friend nor an old enemy.
the truth hurts  It is often unpleasant 
to learn the truth: “We want the truth. 
The President wants it. I want it. And 
the American people have a fundamental 
right to it. And if the truth hurts, so be it” 
(George Bush, New York Times, 1986). The 
fi rst recorded use of this proverb is in Rob-
ert Browning’s Fifi ne at the Fair (1872).
truth is stranger than fi ction  The truth 
is often far more unlikely than anything 
that can be dreamed up by the imagina-
tion: “He has based all his brilliancy and 
solidity upon the hackneyed, but yet 
forgotten, fact that truth is stranger than 
fi ction. Truth, of course, must of necessity 
be stranger than fi ction, for we have made 
fi ction to suit ourselves” (G. K. Chester-
ton, Heretics, 1905). The proverb comes 
from Lord Byron’s poem “Don Juan” 
(1823): “’Tis strange—but true; for truth 
is always strange;/Stranger than fi ction; if 
it could be told,/How much would nov-
els gain by the exchange!”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
fact is stranger than fiction.
truth is the fi rst casualty of war  When 
war breaks out, the truth quickly succumbs 
to propaganda and rumor. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1928 by A. Ponsonby in 
Falsehood in Wartime: “When war is declared, 
Truth is the fi rst casualty.”
truth is truth to the end of the reckon-
ing  The truth can never be changed: If 
it was true then, it is must be true now—truth 
is truth to the end of the reckoning. In its 
current form, the proverb comes from 
Shakespeare’s play Measure for Measure 
(5:1; 1604), “Nay, it is ten times true; for 
truth is truth/To the end of reckoning.” 
The sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
earlier origin.
truth lies at the bottom of a well  It is 
often very diffi cult to discover the truth: 
We will probably never know exactly what hap-
pened on that night—truth lies at the bottom 
of a well, and everybody I’ve interviewed so 
far has given me a different version of events. 
The proverb is attributed to the Greek 
philosopher Democritus (c. 460–c. 370 
b.c.): “we know nothing certainly, for 
truth lies in the deep.”
Variant of this proverb: truth keeps 
to the bottom of her well.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: truth will out.
truth will out  The truth cannot be con-
cealed forever: “After all, the names of 
the principal characters will be quite as 
trust not one night’s ice
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   280 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
281
much disguised; for though in this history 
the chronicler would prefer to conceal 
the facts under a mass of contradic-
tions, anachronisms, improbabilities, and 
absurdities, the truth will out in spite of 
him” (Honoré de Balzac, The Collection of 
Antiquities, 1839). First recorded in 1439, 
the proverb occurs in Shakespeare’s play 
The Merchant of Venice (2:2), “Truth will 
come to light; murder cannot be hid 
long; a man’s son may, but in the end 
truth will out.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: truth lies at the bottom of a well.
try before you trust  See first try then 
trust.
Tuesday’s child is full of grace  Chil-
dren born on a Tuesday are supposed to 
be graceful in movement and bearing; 
also interpreted in other senses of the 
word grace: If it were true that Tuesday’s child 
is full of grace, you might expect to fi nd that a 
disproportionate number of ballet dancers and 
models were born on that day. The proverb is 
the second line of a traditional rhyme. See 
entries at the days of the week for other 
proverbs from this rhyme.
TURKISH PROVERBS
Turkish proverbs cover many subjects, but they are perhaps at their most distinctive when 
discussing the facing of diffi culty of one kind or another.
Coffee should be black as hell, strong as death, and sweet as love
The eagle does not feed on fl ies
A friend is one soul in two bodies
He who controls his tongue saves his head
He who has no children has one sorrow, he who has children has a thousand 
sorrows
A hungry dog will bring a lion down
If you fall in a river hang on to a snake
If you look for a faultless woman you will remain a bachelor
In the company of the blind, close your eyes
To live in peace one must be blind, deaf, and mute
Measure a thousand times, cut once
No matter how far down a wrong road you are, turn back
One armpit cannot hold two watermelons
One bad experience is worth more than a thousand threats
One eats, another watches; that’s how revolutions are born
Profi t is the brother of loss
Sometimes you have to sacrifi ce your beard in order to save your head
So the music, so the people
When God wants to please a poor man, He lets him lose his donkey and then 
helps him fi nd it again
You don’t wash blood away with blood but with water
ååååå
 Tuesday’s child is full of grace
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   281 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
282
turnabout is fair play  Taking turns to do 
something is the fairest way to proceed: 
Come away from the computer and let your 
sister use it for a while—turnabout is fair play. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1755.
two and two make four  Logic dictates 
that something must be so: Two and two 
make four and the geologists were forced to 
admit that the signs of an impending earth-
quake were all there. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1697 in Jeremy Collier’s Essays 
on Moral Subjects.
Variant of this proverb: two and two 
do not make fi ve.
two blacks don’t make a white  See two 
wrongs don’t make a right.
two boys are half a boy, and three boys 
are no boy at all  When two or more 
boys work together, they distract each 
other and do less work between them than 
a single boy working alone: If the twins and 
their brother offer to help, I usually pick just 
one of them, on the principle that two boys are 
half a boy, and three boys are no boy at all. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1930 in 
F. Thompson’s Country Calendar.
two can keep a secret if one is dead  See 
three may keep a secret, if two of them 
are dead.
two dogs fi ght over a bone while a third 
runs away with it  See while two dogs 
are fighting for a bone, a third runs 
away with it.
two eyes see more than one  See four 
eyes see more than two.
two heads are better than one  A prob-
lem is more quickly solved if two people 
put their minds to it: Can you help me 
check these fi gures? There’s an error in here 
somewhere, but I can’t fi nd it, and two heads 
are better than one. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1390 in John Gower, Confessio 
Amantis in the form “Tuo han more wit 
then on.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
four eyes see more than two.
two is company but three is none  See 
two’s company, three’s a crowd.
two of a trade never agree  Members 
of the same trade or profession often do 
not get on with one another, because of 
rivalry: They say that two of a trade never 
agree, but my parents, both accountants, have 
been happily married for 30 years now. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with differ-
ent wording, in 1630 by Thomas Dekker, 
Honest Whore, Part II.
Variant of this proverb: two of a 
trade seldom agree.
two’s company, three’s a crowd  Two 
people, especially friends or lovers, often 
regard a third as an unwelcome intruder: 
Why does she always want to tag along with 
us? Has she never heard the saying “Two’s 
company, three’s a crowd” ? The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in the mid-19th century, 
in the form “Two is company but three 
is none,” (W. C. Hazlitt, English Proverbs) 
but the sentiment it expresses is of ear-
lier origin.
Variants of this proverb: two is com-
pany but three is none; two’s a couple, 
three’s a crowd, four’s too many, and 
fi ve’s not allowed.
two tailors go to a man  See nine tai-
lors make a man.
turnabout is fair play
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   282 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
283
two wrongs don’t make a right  Wrong-
doing is always unacceptable, even if 
another person has done the same thing; 
often used to discourage or condemn 
retaliation: “‘Why didn’t you just hit him 
over the head and take the bedsheet away 
from him?’ Yossarian asked. . . . Milo shook 
his head. ‘That would have been unjust,’ 
he scolded fi rmly. ‘Force is wrong, and 
two wrongs never make a right’” (Joseph 
Heller, Catch-22, 1961). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, in its variant form, in 
1721. In The Second Sin (1773), Thomas 
Szasz mischievously argued that “Two 
wrongs don’t make a right, but they make 
a good excuse.”
Variant of this proverb: two blacks 
don’t make a white.
 two wrongs don’t make a right
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   283 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
ååå   å
284
uneasy lies the head that wears a 
crown  Those in power are weighed 
down by responsibilities, feelings of inse-
curity, or fears of losing their position 
and can never rest easy: “‘Uneasy lies the 
head that wears a crown!’ Stepan Arka-
dyevich said playfully, hinting, evidently, 
not simply at the Princess’s conversation, 
but at the cause of Levin’s agitation, 
which he had noticed” (Leo Tolstoy, Anna 
Karenina, 1873–77). The proverb comes 
from Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, Part 2 
(3:1; 1597), “Canst thou, O partial sleep, 
give thy repose/To the wet sea-boy in an 
hour so rude,/And in the calmest and 
most stillest night,/ . . . /Deny it to a king? 
Then happy low, lie down!/Uneasy lies 
the head that wears a crown.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the highest branch is not the 
safest roost; the post of honor is the 
post of danger.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: better be first in a village than 
second at rome.
the unexpected always happens  You 
can be always be sure that something 
unforeseen will happen for which you 
are not prepared: “Have nothing which 
in a case of emergency you cannot carry 
in your own hands. But remember that 
the unexpected always happens” (Evelyn 
Waugh, Scoop, 1938). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in 1885, but the 
sentiment it expresses is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the writings of the Roman 
dramatist Plautus (c. 250–184 b.c.).
Variant of this proverb: it’s always 
the unexpected that happens.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
nothing is certain but the unforeseen.
union is strength  People can achieve 
greater things by working together than by 
working alone: “Union is strength; union is 
also weakness. It is a good thing to harness 
two horses to a cart; but it is not a good 
thing to try and turn two hansom cabs into 
one four-wheeler” (G. K. Chesterton, Her-
etics, 1905). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in English in 1654 in the form “Union 
strengthens.” The sentiment it expresses, 
however, is of ancient origin, occurring 
in Homer’s Iliad (c. eighth century b.c.): 
“even weak men have strength in unity.”
Variant of this proverb: in unity 
there is strength.
united we stand, divided we fall  It is 
important that a group of people remain 
united in order to succeed; often used 
to discourage dissatisfi ed members from 
breaking away: We must have the support of 
u
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   284 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
285
the entire workforce in this protest—united we 
stand, divided we fall. The proverb comes 
from John Dickinson’s “Liberty Song,” 
published in the Boston Gazette in 1768: 
“Then join hand in hand, brave Americans 
all,/By uniting we stand, by dividing we 
fall.” The sentiment it expresses, however, 
is of ancient origin, occurring in one of the 
fables of Aesop (sixth century b.c.), about 
a lion that persuades a group of bulls to 
separate and kills them one by one.
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
divide and conquer; a house divided 
against itself cannot stand.
use brains not brawn  See wisdom goes 
beyond strength.
the used key is always bright  Activity, 
work, and exercise keep the mind and 
body in good form: You must practice 
regularly to keep your skills up to scratch—the 
used key is always bright. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, in 
1561 in Kitt Hath Lost Key.
Variant of this proverb: iron not used 
soon rusts.
use legs and have legs  The body, among 
other things, will continue to work prop-
erly only if kept in regular use: When it 
comes to the maintenance of general fi tness the 
old adage “use legs and have legs” still holds 
true. First recorded in G. Harvey, Margina-
lia (c. 1582): “Use Legges, & have Legges: 
Use Law and Have Law. Use nether & 
have nether.”
use your head and save your feet  See 
let your head save your heels.
 use your head and save your feet 
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   285 1/29/07   5:13:05 PM
ååå   å
286
variety is the spice of life  Change and 
difference make life interesting: People who 
never go to the same place twice on vacation 
fall into two groups—those who believe that 
variety is the spice of life and those who are con-
stantly and vainly searching for the ideal spot. 
The proverb comes from William Cowper’s 
poem “The Task” (1785): “Variety’s the very 
spice of life,/That gives it all its fl avour.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a change is as good as a rest.
the vicar of Bray will be vicar of Bray 
still  Some people doggedly cling to offi ce 
or other privileges however much cir-
cumstances might change around them: 
The chairman refused to resign after the vote, 
prompting one of his critics to observe “the vicar 
of Bray will be vicar of Bray still.” The proverb 
was recorded by Thomas Fuller in The His-
tory of the Worthies of England in 1662. It 
refers to an infamous vicar of Bray who 
during the reign of Henry VIII stubbornly 
held onto his post, fi rst as a Catholic, then 
as a Protestant.
victory has a hundred fathers and defeat 
is an orphan  See success has many 
fathers, while failure is an orphan.
virtue is its own reward  The satisfaction 
of knowing you have done the right thing 
is all that is needed: I know that virtue is its 
own reward, and I certainly didn’t expect to 
be paid for my efforts, but she could at least 
have thanked me! First recorded in Eng-
lish in 1509, in the form “Virtue has no 
reward,” the proverb has been traced back 
to the works of the Roman poet Ovid (43 
b.c.–a.d. 18).
the voice of the people is the voice of 
God  The will of the people must be 
obeyed; also used to imply that the peo-
ple are always right: “One Sansculottic 
bough that cannot fail to fl ourish is Jour-
nalism. The voice of the People being the 
voice of God, shall not such divine voice 
make itself heard? To the ends of France; 
and in as many dialects as when the fi rst 
great Babel was to be built!” (Thomas 
Carlyle, The French Revolution, 1837). Of 
ancient origin, the proverb is sometimes 
used in its original Latin form, “Vox populi, 
vox Dei.”
a volunteer is worth ten pressed 
men  See one volunteer is worth two 
pressed men.
v
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   286 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
ååå   å
287
walls have ears  What you say may be 
overheard; used as a warning: “In Paris, 
where walls have ears, where doors have 
tongues, and window bars have eyes, there 
are few things more dangerous than the 
practice of standing to chat in a gateway” 
(Honoré de Balzac, Cousin Pons, 1847–48). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1592.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
fields have eyes and woods have ears.
walnuts and pears you plant for your 
heirs  Walnut trees and pear trees take 
a long time to produce fruit: A new fast-
yielding variety has been developed, giving 
the lie to the old saying “Walnuts and pears 
you plant for your heirs.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1732 in the form “He 
who plants a walnut tree expects not to 
eat of the fruit.” The idea that trees of any 
kind are generally planted for the benefi t 
of succeeding generations, however, is of 
ancient origin.
wanton kittens make sober cats  Peo-
ple who live wildly or extravagantly in 
their youth usually develop into sensible 
and responsible adults: I’ve heard that wan-
ton kittens make sober cats, but it was hard 
to believe that the demure young woman who 
answered the door was the troublesome girl 
who had caused her parents so much anxiety 
several years earlier. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1732 in Thomas Fuller, Gno-
mologia: Adagies and Proverbs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
time is the rider that breaks youth.
war is hell  War is a horrifi c experience 
and a terrible thing: “Let’s not regard the 
Germans as enemies. War is never black 
or white: war is hell for all involved” 
(Time, 1994). The proverb is associated 
with General William T. Sherman, who 
used it in 1880: “There is many a boy 
here today who looks on war as all glory, 
but, boys, it is all hell.” The sentiment it 
expresses, however, is of earlier origin.
war is too important to be left to the 
generals  Those in authority cannot be 
relied on to do their job properly; applied 
to warfare, diplomacy, or government: 
War is too important to be left to the gener-
als, even in peacetime—the offensive action 
ordered by the police chiefs only heightened the 
tension and exacerbated the riot. The proverb 
has been attributed to various people, 
notably the French politicians Charles-
Maurice de Talleyrand (1754–1838) and 
Georges Clemenceau (1841–1929).
war will cease when men refuse to 
fi ght  There will always be war while 
w
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   287 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
288
there are people who are prepared to 
serve in the armed forces; a pacifi st 
slogan: If it is true that war will cease when 
men refuse to fi ght, then the present military 
recruitment crisis should not be a cause for 
alarm. The proverb is of 20th-century 
origin.
waste not, want not  If you make full 
and careful use of your resources, you will 
never be in need; applied to everything 
from the eating up of leftover food to 
domestic and industrial recycling: “There 
were, besides, some little pleasures in 
the shape of helping her to vegetable 
she didn’t want, and when it had nearly 
alighted on her plate taking across for his 
own use, on the plea of waste not, want 
not” (Thomas Hardy, Under the Green-
wood Tree, 1872). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in this form in 1800 (in Maria 
Edgeworth, Parent’s Assistant), but the sen-
timent it expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
willful waste makes woeful want.
a watched pot never boils  It seems that 
things take longer to happen when you 
watch or wait with impatience: “What’s 
the use of watching? A watched pot never 
boils, and I see you are after watching 
that weather-cock. Why now, I try never 
to look at it, else I could do nought else” 
(Elizabeth Gaskell, Mary Barton, 1848). 
This quotation is the fi rst recorded use of 
the proverb.
water fi nds its own level  See water 
seeks its own level.
water is the only drink for a wise 
man  Wise people avoid drinking alco-
hol: He is strictly teetotal, never having 
touched a drop in his life, believing that water 
is the only drink for a wise man. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1854, in Henry 
David Thoreau’s Walden.
water seeks its own level  People tend 
to be drawn toward, or to end up with, 
others of the same background, class, 
intelligence, or experience: You can’t go 
on pretending to be better than you are—water 
seeks its own level. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1778 in Public Papers of George 
Clinton, First Governor of New York.
Variant of this proverb: water fi nds 
its own level.
the way to a man’s heart is through his 
stomach  The best way to please a man 
is by feeding him well: “‘Well, you know, 
the way to a man’s heart is through his 
stomach, Cornelia,’ explained Captain 
Jim. ‘I believe you—when he HAS a 
heart,’ retorted Miss Cornelia. ‘I suppose 
that’s why so many women kill them-
selves cooking’” (Lucy Maud Montgom-
ery, Anne’s House of Dreams, 1917). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1814, in the 
form “The shortest road to men’s hearts 
is down their throats,” in a letter written 
by John Adams.
the way to be safe is never to feel 
secure  See he that is too secure is 
not safe.
the weakest go to the wall  In any con-
fl ict or struggle, the weakest will always 
lose, be defeated, fail, or be ruined: You 
have to be aggressive and self-assertive to 
survive in this industry, where the weakest go 
to the wall. The proverb dates from before 
1500, and occurs in Shakespeare’s play 
Romeo and Juliet (1:1). It is said to have 
waste not, want not
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   288 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
289
originally referred to seating installed 
around the walls of medieval churches, 
and has given rise to the fi gurative phrase 
to go to the wall, to be ruined; to fall or fail 
in a struggle.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
providence is always on the side of 
the big battalions.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the race is not to the swift, nor 
the battle to the strong.
we all have our cross to bear  Nobody is 
exempt from suffering—we all have our 
own problems and affl ictions: I know life is 
hard for him, but I wish he wouldn’t complain 
so much—we all have our cross to bear. The 
proverb is an allusion to the biblical quo-
tation “And whosoever doth not bear his 
cross, and come after me, cannot be my 
disciple” (Luke 14:27).
wealth makes many friends  Many 
people want to be the friend of a rich 
person: Wealth makes many friends—but 
these so-called friends will lose interest in you 
when your money runs out. The proverb is 
of biblical origin: “Wealth maketh many 
friends; but the poor is separated from his 
neighbor” (Proverbs 19:4).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that has a full purse never wanted 
a friend.
the wearer best knows where the shoe 
pinches  Nobody can fully understand 
another person’s hardship or suffering: 
The wearer best knows where the shoe pinches, 
and charitable organizations must consult with 
those they are trying to help, so that the aid 
can be directed where it is most needed. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “I 
woot best where wryngeth me my sho.” 
The sentiment it expresses, however, is of 
ancient origin, occurring in the writings 
of Plutarch (c. 46–c. a.d. 120).
wear your learning like your watch, in a 
private pocket  Do not make a show of 
your knowledge or education: She is one 
of those who believe that you should wear your 
learning like your watch, in a private pocket, 
and few people would guess that she is one of 
the country’s leading astronomers. The prov-
erb comes from a letter written by Lord 
Chesterfi eld in 1748: “Wear your learn-
ing, like your watch in a private pocket: 
and do not merely pull it out and strike it; 
merely to show that you have one.”
wedlock is a padlock  Marriage brings 
with it many restrictions on personal 
freedom: Wedlock is a padlock, and divorce 
lawyers make a comfortable income selling peo-
ple the key. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1678 in John Ray’s English Proverbs.
Wednesday’s child is full of woe  Chil-
dren born on a Wednesday are supposed to 
be miserable by nature: My mother gave up 
trying to make Sam smile for the camera—he 
was born on a Wednesday, and seemed determined 
to prove that Wednesday’s child is full of woe. 
The proverb is the third line of a traditional 
rhyme. See entries at the days of the week 
for other proverbs from this rhyme.
we have nothing to fear but fear 
itself  See the only thing we have to 
fear is fear itself.
welcome is the best cheer  Welcoming 
your guests with friendly hospitality is 
more important than giving them fi ne food 
and wine: Tom is a kind, generous, and jovial 
 welcome is the best cheer
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   289 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
290
host, which makes up for his shortcomings in the 
kitchen—as they say, welcome is the best cheer. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1550 in 
the form “Welcome is the best dish.”
Variant of this proverb: welcome is 
the best dish on the table.
well begun is half done  If you make 
a good start to a task, it will be quickly 
completed: If you cut the pieces out carefully 
and accurately, you will have no diffi culty fi t-
ting them together—well begun is half done. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in English, 
with different wording, c. 1415. The sen-
timent it expresses, however, is of ancient 
origin, occurring in the writings of Plato 
and Horace.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a good beginning is half the battle.
we must eat a peck of dirt before we 
die  Everybody must suffer a certain 
amount of unpleasantness during his or 
her lifetime; also used literally, as when 
eating unwashed food: Whenever I came 
home from school with a tale of woe, my mother 
would console me with her favorite saying, “We 
must eat a peck of dirt before we die.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1738, in 
Jonathan Swift’s Polite Conversation.
Variant of this proverb: you have to 
eat a bushel of dirt before you die.
we must learn to walk before we can 
run  It is necessary to learn the basics 
before progressing to more advanced 
things: “More fail from doing too much 
than too little. We must learn and be 
strong enough to walk before we can run” 
(James Platt, Business, 1875). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, c. 1350. Early examples of its use had 
creep and go in place of walk and run.
Variant of this proverb: you have to 
learn to crawl before you can walk.
a wet May brings plenty of hay  Wet 
weather in May means the hay harvest will 
be good later in the year: As farmers every-
where will tell you, “a wet May brings plenty 
of hay.” The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1846 in M. A. Denham’s A Collection of 
Proverbs . . . relating to the Weather.
what a tangled web we weave when fi rst 
we practice to deceive  Once you have 
told one lie, you fi nd yourself supporting 
it with other related lies, constructing an 
elaborate network of deceit from which it 
is not easy to escape: “People have pretty 
well forgotten my other mistakes. . . . But 
they’ll never forget this. They will think 
I am not respectable. Oh, Marilla, ‘what 
a tangled web we weave when fi rst we 
practice to deceive.’ That is poetry, but it 
is true.” (Lucy Maud Montgomery, Anne 
of Green Gables, 1908). The proverb comes 
from Sir Walter Scott’s poem Marmion 
(1808).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
one lie leads to another.
what can’t be cured must be endured  If 
something cannot be put right, we must 
learn to put up with it: “‘What cannot be 
cured must be endured,’ the chained man 
says, trying to smile. But it comes out as 
a grimace” (Washington Post, 1997). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1579, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin.
what can you expect from a pig but a 
grunt?  Boorish or uncouth people can-
not be expected to behave in any other 
way; used as an insult when such a person 
well begun is half done
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   290 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
291
says or does something rude: His remark 
was in very poor taste, but what can you expect 
from a pig but a grunt? The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
in 1731.
whatever man has done, man may do  If 
one person has succeeded in doing some-
thing, it should not be impossible for 
another person to do it too: “‘Dark Deeds 
are written in an unknown tongue called 
“Lawyerish,” where the sense is “as one 
grain of wheat in two bushels of chaff,” 
pick it out if you can.’ ‘Whatever man 
has done man may do,’ said Dr. Sampson 
stoutly. ‘You have read it, and yet under-
stood it: so why mayn’t we, ye monster 
o’ conceit?’” (Charles Reade, Hard Cash, 
1863). The quotation is the fi rst recorded 
use of the proverb.
Variant of this proverb: what man 
has done, man can do.
what everybody says must be true  Pub-
lic opinion is generally assumed to be accu-
rate: “Everybody said so. Far be it from me 
to assert that what everybody says must 
be true. Everybody is, often, as likely to 
be wrong as right” (Charles Dickens, The 
Haunted Man and the Ghost’s Bargain, 1848). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, with dif-
ferent wording, c. 1475.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: common fame is seldom to blame; 
there’s no smoke without fire.
what goes around, comes around  Those 
who say or do bad things to other people 
are likely to fi nd themselves on the 
receiving end of similar criticism or 
treatment in the future; also used to 
imply that everybody eventually gets his 
or her just deserts: “No sooner had the 
royal accusers sent Louis XVI and his 
queen to the guillotine, than they them-
selves were being hoist onto the tumbrels 
by men whose own heads would later 
drop into the basket. What goes around 
comes around” (Washington Times, 1989). 
Of U.S. origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1974.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: curses, like chickens, come home 
to roost.
what goes up must come down  The 
law of gravity must be obeyed; also used 
fi guratively of any rise and fall: What goes 
up must come down, even on Wall Street, and 
you must sell your stocks at exactly the right 
moment to get the best return on your invest-
ment. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1929 in F. A. Pottle’s Stretchers.
what has happened once can happen 
again  Something that has a precedent 
cannot be dismissed as impossible, and 
may recur: What has happened once can 
happen again, but next time we will be better 
prepared to control the disease before it reaches 
epidemic proportions. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1815 in Journal of a Young Man 
of Massachusetts.
what man has done, man can do  See 
whatever man has done, man may do.
what must be, must be  See what will 
be, will be.
what’s bred in the bone will come out 
in the fl esh  Inherited characteristics 
be come evident in each new generation: 
In his middle years he became an alcoholic, like 
his father and grandfather before him—what’s 
bred in the bone will come out in the fl esh. Of 
 what’s bred in the bone will come out in the fl esh
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   291 1/29/07   5:13:06 PM
292
medieval Latin origin, the proverb was 
fi rst recorded in English in Sir Thomas 
Malory’s Le Morte d’Arthur (c. 1470), 
in the form “Harde hit ys to take oute 
off the fl eysshe that ys bredde in the 
bone.” The current form of the proverb 
is a comparatively recent alteration of 
the original, “What’s bred in the bone 
will not (come) out of the fl esh,” which 
has a slightly different meaning, imply-
ing that inherited characteristics cannot 
be eradicated: “Even Benjamin lost all 
patience with me this time. ‘What is 
bred in the bone,’ he said, quoting the 
old proverb, ‘will never come out of the 
fl esh. In years gone by, you were the most 
obstinate child that ever made a mess in 
a nursery’” (Wilkie Collins, The Law and 
the Lady, 1875).
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: blood will tell; nature passes 
nurture.
what’s done cannot be undone  Once 
something has been done, it cannot 
be changed, no matter how much you 
regret having done it: “‘I shouldn’t have 
hurried on our affair, and brought you 
to a half-furnished hut before I was 
ready, if it had not been for the news 
you gave me, which made it necessary to 
save you, ready or no . . . Good God!’ 
‘Don’t take on, dear. What’s done can’t 
be undone’” (Thomas Hardy, Jude the 
Obscure, 1895). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English c. 1450, but the sen-
timent it expresses is of ancient origin. 
It occurs in Shakespeare’s play Macbeth 
(1605–06) in both its forms, “What’s 
done is done” (3:2) and “What’s done 
cannot be undone” (5:1).
Variant of this proverb: what’s done 
is done.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: it’s no use crying over spilled milk; 
things past cannot be recalled.
what’s good for General Motors is good 
for America  Anything that benefi ts busi-
ness and commerce is of benefi t to the 
country as a whole: “You will never hear 
from me . . . that this country should do 
this or that simply because business wants 
it. What is good for General Motors may, 
or may not, be good for the country” 
(Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., A Thousand 
Days, 1965). In its current form, the 
proverb comes from testimony given in 
1953 by Charles Erwin Wilson, president 
of General Motors, regarding his nomina-
tion as secretary of defense: “For many 
years I thought what was good for our 
country was good for General Motors, 
and vice versa.” Other words may be sub-
stituted for General Motors and America.
what’s got over the devil’s back is spent 
under his belly  Money that is acquired 
by illicit or immoral means is spent in a 
similar manner: They travel from one resort 
to the next, fl eecing or robbing the tourists by 
day and squandering their ill-gotten gains in 
the bars and brothels by night—what’s got 
over the devil’s back is spent under his belly. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1582 in 
S. Gosson’s Plays Confuted.
Variant of this proverb: nothing goes 
over the back but that comes under the 
belly.
what’s in a name?  The names borne 
by or given to people and things are not 
important: What’s in a name? Why pay $200 
for a jacket with a designer label when you can 
buy one of the same—if not better—quality 
for half the price? The proverb comes from 
what’s done cannot be undone
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   292 1/29/07   5:13:07 PM
293
Shakespeare’s play Romeo and Juliet (2:2), 
“What’s in a name? that which we call a 
rose/By any other name would smell as 
sweet.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a rose by any other name would smell 
as sweet.
what’s new cannot be true  People 
are always skeptical about new ideas: 
Throughout the ages, scientists and inventors 
have struggled against the popular miscon-
ception that what’s new cannot be true. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded, with different 
wording, in 1639 in J. Clarke’s Parœmiolo-
gia Anglo-Latina.
what’s past is prologue  Everything that 
has gone before is just the introduction 
to what is still to come: “A century and a 
quarter. A long time for any commercial 
entity, and something to take pride in. 
And we do, while bearing in mind that 
‘what’s past is prologue.’ It’s the next 125 
years that really count” (New York Times, 
1991). The proverb comes from Shake-
speare’s play The Tempest (2:1; 1611), 
“We all were sea-swallow’d, though 
some cast again,/And by that destiny to 
perform an act/Whereof what’s past is 
prologue, what to come/In yours and 
my discharge.”
what’s sauce for the goose is sauce for 
the gander  What is appropriate for one 
person is equally appropriate for another 
person in a similar situation; sometimes 
used in the context of sexual equality: If 
smoking is to be banned on the factory fl oor, 
then it should also be banned in the board-
room—what’s sauce for the goose is sauce for 
the gander. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1670 in John Ray’s English Proverbs.
what’s yours is mine, and what’s mine is 
my own  People often expect free use 
of what belongs to others while refusing 
to share their own property: My husband’s 
salary will be paid into our joint account, and 
I have set up a separate account for my own 
earnings. This is just to simplify my business 
affairs, as I’m self-employed—I have assured 
my husband that it is not a case of “What’s 
yours is mine, and what’s mine is my own”! 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1591. 
It is a facetious alteration of the less selfi sh 
notion “What’s yours is mine, and what’s 
mine is yours,” associated with the sharing 
of money and possessions in marriage.
Variant of this proverb: what’s yours 
is mine, and what’s mine is mine.
what the eye doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t 
grieve over  Nobody can be upset by 
something that he or she is unaware of: He 
tried to exculpate himself by concealing all the 
evidence from his wife and saying, “What the 
eye doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t grieve over.” 
The proverb dates from before the 12th 
century, when it was used in a sermon by 
Saint Bernard: “Quod non videt oculus cor 
non dolet [What the eye sees not, the heart 
does not grieve at].”
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
admiration is the daughter of igno-
rance; what you don’t know can’t 
hurt you.
what the soldier said isn’t evi-
dence  Gossip, hearsay, and rumor are 
not reliable sources of the truth: You need 
more than a secondhand account from an eye-
witness to prove your case—what the soldier 
said isn’t evidence. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1837, in Charles Dickens’s 
novel The Pickwick Papers: “‘You must not 
tell us what the soldier, or any other man, 
 what the soldier said isn’t evidence
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   293 1/29/07   5:13:07 PM
294
said, sir,’ interposed the judge; ‘it’s not 
evidence.’”
what will be, will be  What is destined 
to happen cannot be prevented: There’s no 
point in worrying about the future—what will 
be, will be. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): 
“Whan a thyng is shapen, it shal be.” It is 
sometimes quoted in its Italian form, “Che 
sarà, sarà,” which was popularized in the 
mid-20th century as a line from the song 
“Whatever Will Be Will Be.”
Variant of this proverb: what must 
be, must be.
what you don’t know can’t hurt you  It 
is often better to remain in ignorance 
of things that could distress you: I 
decided that it would be wiser—and perhaps 
kinder—not to tell my parents the whole 
story of what happened that night, on the 
basis of the saying “What you don’t know 
can’t hurt you.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1576 in G. Pettie’s Petit 
Palace.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: ignorance is bliss; what the eye 
doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t grieve 
over.
what you lose on the swings you gain 
on the roundabouts  Gains and losses 
tend to balance one another overall: 
Their delivery charges are higher, but their 
prices are lower—what you lose on the swings 
you gain on the roundabouts. The proverb 
comes from Patrick Reginald Chalmers’s 
poem “Roundabouts and Swings” (1912): 
“What’s lost upon the roundabouts we 
pulls up on the swings!” It has given 
rise to the fi gurative phrase swings and 
roundabouts.
Variant of this proverb: what you 
gain on the swings you lose on the round-
abouts.
what you put off and what you put on, 
never change till May be gone  See 
ne’er cast a clout till may be out.
what you see is what you get  Things 
or people are exactly as they seem; 
used to imply honesty, straightforward-
ness, etc.: “‘My wife says I’m the most 
uncomplicated man in the world,’ Duka-
kis admits. ‘I guess I am.’ Even his 
83-year-old mother says of him, ‘What 
you see is what you get’” (Time, 1987). 
First recorded in 1971, the proverb has 
acquired a specialized use (abbreviated 
to WYSIWYG) in the world of comput-
ing, where it means “What you see on 
the screen is exactly what you will get 
on the printout.”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: appearances are deceiving.
what you’ve never had you never 
miss  People do not feel the lack of 
something they have never possessed or 
enjoyed: “I castrate the male lambs . . . 
about an hour after they have been born. 
They say what you’ve never had, you 
never miss” (Ronald Blythe, Akenfi eld, 
1969). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1912 in Jean Webster’s Daddy Long-Legs.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t lose what you never had.
the wheel comes full circle  Things 
eventually reach a situation resembling 
that from which they began: The word 
originally meant “foolish” or “ignorant,” but 
over the centuries it lost its derogatory con-
notations and came to mean “amusing” or 
what will be, will be
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   294 1/29/07   5:13:07 PM
295
“pleasant.” However, the wheel comes full 
circle, and the word is now used as an 
expression of contempt. The proverb comes 
from Shakespeare’s play King Lear (5:3; 
1605), “The wheel is come full circle: 
I am here.”
the wheel of fortune is forever in 
motion  People’s fortunes are constantly 
changing—somebody who has good luck 
one year may have bad luck the next, and 
vice versa: It seemed that nothing could go 
wrong, but the wheel of fortune is forever in 
motion, and disaster struck the following day. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1748 in 
Papers of Benjamin Franklin.
the wheel that does the squeaking is 
the one that gets the grease  See the 
squeaky wheel gets the grease.
when Adam delved and Eve span, who 
was then the gentleman?  The class sys-
tem has not always existed and is therefore 
invalid or irrelevant: “‘On what grounds 
do they hold us in vassalage? Do not we all 
come from the same father and mother, 
Adam and Eve?’ The spirit of individual 
freedom breathed itself out in the effec-
tive rhyme, which ran like wildfi re, ‘When 
Adam delved and Eve span/Who was then 
the gentleman?’” (Philip Schaff, History 
of the Christian Church, 1883–1893). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1340 in the 
form “When Adam delved and Eve span, 
where was then the pride of man?” (The 
word delved is archaic for “dug” and “span” 
the archaic past tense of spin.) It was asso-
ciated with the period of social unrest in 
England that culminated in the Peasants’ 
Revolt (1381).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
jack’s as good as his master.
when a dog bites a man, that is not 
news; but when a man bites a dog, that 
is news  The media are only interested 
in unusual or outrageous stories: Need-
less to say, the photos that appeared in all 
the papers the following day were not of the 
president making his historic speech, but of 
him falling down the steps as he left the stage 
afterward. When a dog bites a man, that is 
not news; but when a man bites a dog, that 
is news. The proverb was fi rst recorded 
c. 1880, by John B. Bogart in The New 
York Sun.
when all fruit fails, welcome haws  We 
must accept with gratitude whatever 
is available, even if it is not exactly 
what we want or need: “So even the 
excommunicated will do, when it’s not 
easy to get anyone else. When all fruit 
fails, welcome haws” (Brendan Behan, 
Borstal Boy, 1958). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1721 in James Kelly, Scottish 
Proverbs. The haw is the berry of the haw-
thorn: When there is no fruit generally, 
even hawthorn berries are to be gladly 
received.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
beggars can’t be choosers.
when all you have is a hammer, every-
thing looks like a nail  People with 
a restricted range of knowledge or 
options often try to apply the same 
solution to every problem: “That kind 
of crude misapplication of PCs and 
PC software—the computer world’s 
equivalent of the old saw that ‘when all 
you have is a hammer, everything starts 
to look like a nail’—means death for 
productivity” (PC Magazine, 1989). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1981 in 
the New York Times.
 when all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   295 1/29/07   5:13:07 PM
296
when a man’s single, his pockets will jin-
gle  Unmarried men have more money 
than those who have a wife and family 
to support: When a man’s single, his pockets 
will jingle, but money isn’t everything, and a 
bachelor’s life can be a lonely one.
when Greek meets Greek, then comes 
the tug of war  A contest or struggle 
between equally matched opponents is a 
long and fi erce battle: There is no prospect 
of an early end to the dispute, both sides hav-
ing considerable support from different sectors 
of the general public—when Greek meets 
Greek, then comes the tug of war. The prov-
erb comes from Nathaniel Lee’s play The 
Rival Queens (1477), about the latter years 
of Alexander the Great: “When Greeks 
joined Greeks, then was the tug of war!”
when house and land are gone and spent, 
then learning is most excellent  It is 
important to have a good education to 
fall back on if you lose or use up all your 
money and material assets: My earnings as 
a child model had provided me with at very 
comfortable nest egg, but my parents urged me 
not to abandon my studies, on the principle that 
“When house and land are gone and spent, then 
learning is most excellent.” The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1752 in S. Foote’s Taste.
Proverb expressing similar mean-
ing: learning is better than house 
or land.
when in doubt, do nothing  If you are 
unsure what to do, it is best to do noth-
ing at all: I thought I heard a scream, and 
wondered if I should call the police, go and 
investigate, or follow the age-old wisdom of 
“When in doubt, do nothing.” The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in George John Whyte-
Melville’s novel Uncle John (1874): “When 
in doubt what to do, he is a wise man who 
does nothing.”
Variant of this proverb: when in 
doubt, leave it out.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: between two stools one falls to 
the ground.
when in Rome, do as the Romans do 
You should always follow the customs, 
rules, and laws of the place where you 
are: I don’t like kissing total strangers, but 
in this country it’s considered impolite not to, 
and when in Rome we must do as the Romans 
do. The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 
1475, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
much earlier origin, and has been attrib-
uted to Saint Ambrose (c. 339–a.d. 97).
Variant of this proverb: when you 
are at Rome, do as Rome does.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
so many countries, so many customs.
when one door closes, another one 
opens  Disappointment or failure is 
usually followed by a new opportunity: I 
didn’t get a part in the musical, but the next 
day’s mail brought an offer of a recording 
contract—when one door closes, another one 
opens. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1586 in D. Rowland’s Lazarillo.
Variant of this proverb: when one 
door shuts, another opens.
when poverty comes in at the door, 
love fl ies out of the window  Financial 
problems can cause the breakdown of a 
marriage or other loving relationship: 
They lived together for fi ve blissfully happy 
years, until their money ran out. Then they 
began to learn the truth of the proverb “When 
poverty comes in at the door, love fl ies out of 
the window.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
when a man’s single, his pockets will jingle
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   296 1/29/07   5:13:07 PM
297
in 1631, in R. Brathwait’s English Gentle-
woman: “It hath been an old Maxime: that 
as pouerty goes in at one doore, loue goes 
out at the other.”
Variant of this proverb: when the 
wolf comes in at the door, love creeps out 
of the window.
when the cat’s away, the mice will 
play  People do as they please in the 
absence of those in authority: “Monsieur 
Grandet entered the room, threw his 
keen eye upon the table, upon Charles, 
and saw the whole thing. ‘Ha! ha! so 
you have been making a feast for your 
nephew; very good, very good, very good 
indeed!’ he said. . . . ‘When the cat’s away, 
the mice will play’” (Honoré de Balzac, 
Eugenie Grandet, 1833). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1607, but with the impli-
cation that it had long been in use. There 
is evidence of a French version, “Ou chat 
na rat regne [Where there is no cat, the rat 
reigns],” in the early 14th century.
when the going gets tough, the tough get 
going  In times of crisis, those who are 
most resilient and determined take action 
and prove their worth: You give up far too 
easily—have you never heard the saying “When 
the going gets tough, the tough get going”? The 
proverb is attributed to the United States 
businessman and diplomat Joseph P. Ken-
nedy (1888–1969), father of President John 
F. Kennedy. It is sometimes used facetiously 
to convey the opposite meaning, with get 
going in the sense of “run away.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
calamity is the touchstone of a brave 
mind.
when the wind is in the east, ’tis neither 
good for man nor beast  An easterly 
wind, which is often piercing and cold, is 
the worst of all: “When the wind’s in the 
East, It’s neither good for man nor beast 
. . . The East-wind with us is commonly 
very sharp, because it comes off the Conti-
nent” (John Ray, A Collection of English Prov-
erbs, 1670). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1600 in R. Cawdrey’s Treasury of Similes.
when the wine is in, the wit is out  Peo-
ple say foolish things when they are 
drunk: “You were talking nonsense at the 
dinner table last night.” “Well, you know what 
they say—when the wine is in, the wit is out.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1390 in 
John Gower’s Confessio Amantis.
when the wolf comes in at the door, love 
creeps out of the window  See when 
poverty comes in at the door, love flies 
out of the window.
when the worst comes, the worst is 
going  See when things are at the 
worst they begin to mend.
when thieves fall out, honest men come 
by their own  A dispute between crimi-
nals is to the advantage of their victims, 
either because they betray one another and 
reveal the truth, or because they are too 
busy arguing to commit the crime in the 
fi rst place: When thieves fall out, honest men 
come by their own—dissension within the gang 
led to one of their members making a full confes-
sion, and ultimately to the release of my brother, 
who had been wrongfully convicted of the crime. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546.
Variant of this proverb: when thieves 
fall out, honest men get their due.
when things are at the worst they begin 
to mend  When things cannot get any 
 when things are at the worst they begin to mend
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   297 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
298
worse, they begin to get better: “‘I have 
heard about it, miss,’ said Dolly, ‘and it’s 
very sad indeed, but when things are at the 
worst they are sure to mend.’ ‘But are you 
sure they are at the worst?’ asked Emma 
with a smile. ‘Why, I don’t see how they can 
very well be more unpromising than they 
are; I really don’t,’ said Dolly” (Charles 
Dickens, Barnaby Rudge, 1841). The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1582 in G. Whet-
stone’s Heptameron of Civil Discourses.
Variant of this proverb: when the 
worst comes, the worst is going.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: after a storm comes a calm; the 
darkest hour is just before dawn.
when two ride one horse, one must sit 
behind  See if two ride on a horse, 
one must ride behind.
when you are at Rome, do as Rome 
does  See when in rome, do as the 
romans do.
when you are in a hole, stop digging 
When you have landed yourself in trou-
ble, such as through a foolish remark 
or action, do not say or do anything to 
make the situation worse: “Until now 
the president has ignored the fi rst law of 
politics: When you get yourself in a hole, 
stop digging” (Houston Chronicle, 1993). 
First recorded in 1988, the proverb is 
attributed to the British politician Denis 
Healey (1917–  ).
when you argue with a fool, make sure he 
isn’t similarly engaged  Do not assume 
that you are more intelligent or knowl-
edgeable than the person you are arguing 
with: It is better not to enter into a dispute 
unless you are certain of the facts—remember 
the saying “When you argue with a fool, make 
sure he isn’t similarly engaged.”
when you go to dance, take heed whom 
you take by the hand  Beware of getting 
involved with dishonest or unscrupulous 
people: It may sound like an unmissable 
business opportunity, but make sure this guy 
is on the level before you sign anything. As 
my grandmother used to say, “When you go to 
dance, take heed whom you take by the hand.” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1621 in 
Bartholomew Robinson’s Adagia in Latin 
and English.
where bees are, there is honey  Wher-
ever there are industrious people, wealth 
is produced; also used of other types of 
people whose presence is indicative or 
suggestive of something: The company has 
done well not through good fortune, but through 
the hard work of everybody involved—where 
bees are, there is honey. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1616 in T. Draxe’s Adages.
Variant of this proverb: where there 
are bees, there is honey.
where God builds a church, the devil 
will build a chapel  Any force for good, 
such as progress or reform, is inevitably 
accompanied—or closely followed—by 
something bad; not exclusively used in 
religious contexts: “But, human sin and 
imperfection enter into all great move-
ments of history. Wherever God builds a 
church, the Devil is sure to build a cha-
pel close by” (Philip Schaff, History of the 
Christian Church, 1883–1893). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1560. In his satiri-
cal poem “The True-Born Englishman” 
(1701), Daniel Defoe wrote, “Wherever 
God erects a House of Prayer,/The Devil 
always builds a Chapel there:/And ’twill 
when two ride one horse, one must sit behind
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   298 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
299
be found upon Examination,/The latter 
has the largest congregation.”
Variant of this proverb: where God 
has a church, the devil has a chapel.
where ignorance is bliss, ’tis folly to be 
wise  See ignorance is bliss.
where the carcass is, there will the 
eagles be gathered  People are drawn 
together, or to a particular place, when 
they think they will gain something to 
their advantage: “he explained his appear-
ance at the inquest on the twin lines of 
busman’s holiday and that where the car-
cass is there will the vultures be gathered 
together” (Christopher Bush, The Perfect 
Murder Case, 1929). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “For wheresoever the car-
case is, there will the eagles be gathered 
together” (Matthew 24:28). The word 
eagles is sometimes replaced by vultures, as 
in the quotation.
where there are bees, there is honey  See 
where bees are, there is honey.
where there’s a will there’s a way  If 
you are suffi ciently determined to achieve 
something, then you will fi nd a way of 
doing so: It won’t be an easy task, but where 
there’s a will there’s a way. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1640 in the form “To 
him that will, ways are not wanting.” The 
U.S. writer Ambrose Bierce parodied the 
proverb in his Devil’s Dictionary (1911): 
“Where there’s a will there’s a won’t.” 
Other facetious variants, punning on the 
word will, include “Where there’s a will 
there’s a lawsuit” and “Where there’s a 
will there’s relatives.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: he who wills the end, wills the 
means; nothing is impossible to a 
willing heart.
where there’s life there’s hope  See 
while there’s life there’s hope.
where there’s muck there’s brass  There 
is often money to be made wherever 
there is muck or dirt of some kind: It may 
be surprising to many to learn that there are 
millionaires in the refuse-disposal business, but 
where there’s muck there’s brass. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1678 in John Ray’s 
A Collection of English Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: where there’s 
muck there’s money.
where there’s no vision, the people per-
ish  People need hopes and dreams to 
sustain them: “I hope no one ever tries 
to raise a child without a vision. I hope 
nobody ever starts a business or plants a 
crop in the ground without a vision. For 
where there is no vision, the people per-
ish” (Bill Clinton, New York Times, 1992). 
The proverb is of biblical origin: “Where 
there is no vision, the people perish: but 
he that keepeth the law, happy is he” (Prov-
erbs 29:18).
where there’s smoke, there’s fi re  See 
there’s no smoke without fire.
where the tree falls, there it shall lie  See 
as a tree falls, so shall it lie.
which came fi rst, the chicken or the 
egg?  It is sometimes diffi cult to dis-
tinguish between cause and effect: Which 
came fi rst, the chicken or the egg? Did the 
town develop because of the railroad, or was 
the railroad brought here because it was a 
developing town?
 which came fi rst, the chicken or the egg?
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   299 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
300
while the grass grows, the steed 
starves  If somebody has to wait a long 
time for something, it may arrive too late 
to be of use: “I shall sell them next year fast 
enough, after my one-man-show; but while 
the grass grows the steed starves” (George 
Bernard Shaw, The Doctor’s Dilemma, 1906). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1350 in 
the form “While the grass grows, the good 
horse starves.” It occurs in Shakespeare’s 
play Hamlet (3:2; 1600–01), in an exchange 
between Hamlet and Rosencrantz: “‘Sir, I 
lack advancement.’ ‘How can that be when 
you have the voice of the King himself for 
your succession in Denmark?’ ‘Ay, sir, but 
“While the grass grows . . .”—the proverb 
is something musty.’”
Variant of this proverb: while the 
grass grows, the horse starves.
while there’s life there’s hope  Do not 
give up hope while there is the remotest 
possibility of survival, improvement, or 
success: “I will be pleasantly surprised if 
corporate America acts on your ‘wake-up 
call’—but where there’s life there’s hope” 
(Washington Times, 1996). First recorded 
in English in 1539, the proverb is of 
ancient origin, occurring in the writings 
of Cicero (106–43 b.c.): “dum anima est 
spes esse dicitur [as the saying is, while 
there’s life there’s hope].”
Variant of this proverb: where there’s 
life there’s hope.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
never say die.
while two dogs are fi ghting for a bone, 
a third runs away with it  When two 
parties are engaged in a dispute, their 
attention is distracted from what is going 
on around them, and both may end up 
as losers: The larger suppliers were so busy 
trying to underbid each other for the contract, 
they failed to notice that their customer had 
entered into negotiations with another smaller 
company—while two dogs are fi ghting for a 
bone, a third runs away with it. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in this form in 1639, 
but the sentiment it expresses is of earlier 
origin, occurring in Chaucer’s Canterbury 
Tales (c. 1390).
Variant of this proverb: two dogs 
fi ght over a bone while a third runs away 
with it.
whiskey and gasoline don’t mix  Do not 
drive an automobile after drinking alco-
hol: The tables have been turned, and young 
people are now warning their parents that 
whiskey and gasoline don’t mix.
Variant of this proverb: gasoline and 
whiskey don’t mix.
a whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men  Females 
should not do things that are traditionally 
associated with males—it is men who 
whistle and cocks that crow, not women 
and hens; also interpreted more literally: 
Whistling softly to herself as she went about 
her work, she became aware that her grandfa-
ther was looking at her with stern disapproval. 
“A whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men,” he snapped. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form in 
1850, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: a whistling 
girl and a crowing hen always come to the 
same bad end.
a white wall is the fool’s writing 
paper  Only foolish people write on 
walls: It is said that a white wall is the fool’s 
writing paper, but there are occasional nug-
while the grass grows, the steed starves
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   300 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
301
gets of wisdom to be found in the graffi ti that 
adorns the walls of the college lavatories. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1573 in 
James Sanford’s The Garden of Pleasure.
who excuses himself accuses him-
self  See he who excuses himself 
accuses himself.
who has land has war  There will always 
be disputes over the ownership of land; 
also used of larger territorial disputes: 
The saying “Who has land has war” is quite 
true—I’ve lost thousands of dollars in legal 
battles since I bought this ranch. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1579, but with the 
implication that it was already in com-
mon use.
who knows most, speaks least  Wise or 
knowledgeable people say little: Don’t be 
misled by her reserved manner—who knows 
most, speaks least. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1666, in an Italian proverb 
collection.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
those who know don’t speak; those 
who speak don’t know.
whom the gods love die young  Pre-
mature death is a sign that somebody 
is worthy of divine favor because of 
great talent or virtue; also used to 
imply that it is better not to live long: 
“Thrice fortunate! who of that frag-
ile mould,/The precious porcelain of 
human clay,/Break with the first fall 
. . ./‘Whom the gods love die young,’ 
was said of yore,/And many deaths 
do they escape by this:/The death 
of friends, and that which slays even 
more—/The death of friendship, love, 
youth, all that is” (Lord Byron, Don 
Juan, 1819). The proverb is of ancient 
origin, occurring in the writings of the 
Greek poet and dramatist Menander 
(c. 342–292 b.c.).
Proverbs expressing similar meaning: 
god takes soonest those he loveth 
best; the good die young.
whom the gods would destroy, they fi rst 
make mad  Those who commit acts of 
great folly are heading for disaster, the 
implication being that such people lose 
their sanity or good sense because they 
are destined for this end: The company’s 
decision to pull out of such a lucrative market 
was nothing short of lunacy, but whom the 
gods would destroy they fi rst make mad. The 
sentiment expressed by the proverb is of 
ancient origin. The critic Cyril Connolly 
parodied the proverb in Enemies of Promise 
(1938): “Whom the gods wish to destroy 
they fi rst call promising.”
who repairs not his gutters repairs his 
whole house  Those who neglect small 
repairs will fi nd they have to make much 
bigger ones later: It is easy to put aside rou-
tine maintenance jobs, but he who repairs not 
his gutters repairs his whole house. The prov-
erb was fi rst recorded in 1849 in John 
Ruskin’s The Seven Lamps of Architecture.
Variant of this proverb: he that 
repairs not a part, builds all.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: an ounce of prevention is worth 
a pound of cure; prevention is better 
than cure; a stitch in time saves nine.
who says A must say B  If you say or do 
one thing, you must be prepared to say 
or do what logically follows: “But who 
says ‘A’ must say ‘B.’ . . . You can’t talk 
about victims and caring and knowing 
 who says A must say B
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   301 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
302
cows individually while, at the same time, 
you treat carrots as nobodies!” (Washing-
ton Times, 1988). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1838 in the form “If you say 
A, they’ll make you say B.”
Variant of this proverb: never say A 
without saying B.
whose bread I eat, his song I sing  Peo-
ple show loyalty to, or comply with the 
demands of, those who employ, pay, or 
feed them: Unsurprisingly, her views on the 
subject are the same as those already expressed 
by her sponsors—whose bread I eat, his song 
I sing.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he who pays the piper calls the tune.
whosoever draws his sword against 
the prince must throw the scabbard 
away  Those who overthrow a ruler or 
government must be constantly ready to 
defend themselves against a retaliatory 
or counterrevolutionary act: The rebels 
will never be able to live in peace—whosoever 
draws his sword against the prince must throw 
the scabbard away. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1604 in R. Dallington’s View 
of France.
who won’t be ruled by the rudder must 
be ruled by the rock  Those who refuse 
to be guided by reason, advice, or instruc-
tions are heading for disaster: They ignored 
all our warnings, and now they must face the 
consequences—who won’t be ruled by the rud-
der must be ruled by the rock. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1666, in an Italian 
proverb collection.
why buy the cow when you can get the 
milk for free?  There is no point in tak-
ing on the expense and responsibility of a 
wife and family when you can fulfi ll your 
sexual and other needs through casual 
relationships; also used in other contexts: 
Jack has no shortage of girlfriends, but he has 
no plans to marry any of them. As he says, “Why 
buy a cow when you can get the milk for free?” 
The proverb was fi rst recorded, with dif-
ferent wording, in 1659 in James Howell, 
Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: why buy the 
cow when milk is so cheap?
why keep a dog and bark yourself?  If 
you employ somebody to do something 
for you, there is no point in doing it your-
self: I don’t add up the fi gures—that’s my 
accountant’s job. Why keep a dog and bark 
yourself? The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1583 in B. Melbancke’s Philotimus.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: if you would be well served, serve 
yourself.
why should the devil have all the best 
tunes?  Secular songs often have more 
catchy melodies than traditional religious 
music; used as justifi cation for making 
hymn tunes more acceptable to popular 
taste: “The Primitive Methodists . . . act-
ing upon the principle of ‘Why should the 
devil have all the pretty tunes?’ collect 
the airs which are sung at pot and public 
houses, and write their hymns to them” 
(William Chappell, Popular Music of the 
Olden Time, 1859). The quotation is the 
fi rst recorded use of the proverb, which is 
attributed to the British evangelist Rowland 
Hill (1744–1833).
a willful man must have his way  Stub-
born people will do as they please, so 
there is no point in arguing with them: 
I have tried to persuade my father to come 
whose bread I eat, his song I sing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   302 1/29/07   5:13:08 PM
303
and live with us, but I seem to be wasting my 
breath—a willful man must have his way. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1816, in Sir 
Walter Scott’s novel The Antiquary.
willful waste makes woeful want  Reck-
less extravagance leads to dire need: “Now 
young folks go off to Paris, and think noth-
ing of the cost: and it’s well if wilful waste 
don’t make woeful want before they die” 
(Elizabeth Gaskell, Wives and Daughters, 
1866). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
this form in 1721, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
waste not, want not.
the willing horse carries the load  Peo-
ple tend to take advantage of those who 
never complain or refuse: The willing 
horse carries the load, and she often fi nds her-
self working several hours a week longer than 
her less obliging colleagues. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded, with different word-
ing, in 1546 in John Heywood’s Dialogue 
of Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: all lay loads 
on the willing horse.
wine has drowned more men than the 
sea  Overindulgence in alcohol can be 
fatal: If you must drink, do so in modera-
tion—wine has drowned more men than the 
sea. The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1669 in Politeuphuia.
wink at small faults  Let trivial offenses 
go unpunished. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded c. 1598 in William Shake-
speare’s Henry V (2:2): “If little faults 
. . . shall not be wink’d at, how shall we 
stretch our eye when capital crimes . . . 
appear before us?”
a winner never quits, and a quitter never 
wins  You need determination and perse-
verance if you want to succeed: I urged her 
not to give up, reminding her of the saying “A 
winner never quits, and a quitter never wins.”
the winners laugh, the losers weep  See 
let them laugh that win.
winning isn’t everything, it’s the only 
thing  In any competitive situation, 
winning is the only thing that mat-
ters; sometimes said in response to the 
remark “Winning isn’t everything,” or 
used to encourage single-mindedness in 
sportspeople: She was one of those ambi-
tious young lawyers for whom winning isn’t 
everything, it’s the only thing. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1953. It is often 
attributed to the U.S. football coach 
Vince Lombardi, who made a similar 
remark in 1962.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: it’s not whether you win or lose, 
but how you play the game.
winter fi nds out what summer lays up 
When things go awry, that is the time 
when the extent of any resources is tested: 
“Winter draws out what summer laid in” 
(Thomas Fuller, Gnomologia, 1732). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1460 in Good 
Wyf wold a Pylgremage.
wisdom goes beyond strength  Intelli-
gence always outmatches brute strength: 
David’s victory over Goliath merely illustrates 
the truth behind the maxim “wisdom goes 
beyond strength.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1616 in T. Draxe’s Bibliotheca 
Scholastica.
Variant of this proverb: use brains 
not brawn.
 wisdom goes beyond strength
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   303 1/29/07   5:13:09 PM
304
wisdom is better than rubies  Wisdom 
is a highly desirable and very precious 
attribute, more valuable than riches: My 
father was not a wealthy man, but he was very 
wise, and wisdom is better than rubies. The 
proverb is of biblical origin: “For wisdom 
is better than rubies; and all the things 
that may be desired are not to be com-
pared to it” (Proverbs 8:11).
Variant of this proverb: wisdom is 
better than wealth.
a wise lawyer never goes to law him-
self  Those who practice the law and 
understand the costs involved know better 
than to rely upon it themselves. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1642 in G. Torriano’s 
Select Italian Proverbs.
a wise man changes his mind, but a fool 
never does  It is foolish to persist in the 
same opinion or course of action regard-
less of new information or different cir-
cumstances: Accused of making a U-turn in 
policy, the mayor calmly replied, “A wise man 
changes his mind, but a fool never does.” The 
sentiment expressed by the proverb occurs 
in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (c. 1390): “No 
folie to chaunge counseil whan the thyng 
is chaunged.”
a wise man is never less alone than when 
alone  An intelligent person has his or 
her own thoughts for company: She did 
not worry about leaving the professor on his 
own, for he had often told her that a wise 
man is never less alone than when alone. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in English in 
1581 in George Pettie’s Guazzo’s Civil 
Conversation but is of much older, Roman 
origin and is sometimes attributed to 
Scipio Africanus the Elder or otherwise 
to Themistocles.
wise men learn by other men’s mistakes, 
fools by their own  See learn from the 
mistakes of others.
wishes won’t wash dishes  Merely wish-
ing that something was done is not enough 
to get it done. The proverb appears to be a 
relatively recent U.S. introduction dating 
from the 20th century, although similar 
sentiments have been expressed in variant 
forms since the 17th century.
Variant of this proverb: wishes never 
can fi ll a sack.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
if wishes were horses, beggars would 
ride.
the wish is father to the thought  Our 
beliefs and expectations are infl uenced by 
what we want or hope to be true: I think 
she’s looking better this morning, but perhaps 
the wish is father to the thought. The proverb 
comes from Shakespeare’s play Henry IV, 
Part 2 (4:5), “Thy wish was father, Harry, 
to that thought.”
with age comes wisdom  People become 
more sensible and knowledgeable as they 
get older: With age comes wisdom, which is 
perhaps why older drivers have few accidents. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1523 in 
Erasmus’s Adagia.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: an old fox is not easily snared; 
time is the rider that breaks youth.
with friends like that, who needs 
enemies?  Treacherous or disloyal friends 
are worse than enemies: It was one of 
his so-called friends who reported him to the 
police—with friends like that, who needs ene-
mies? The proverb was dates from the early 
20th century.
wisdom is better than rubies
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   304 1/29/07   5:13:09 PM
305
Variant of this proverb: with such 
friends, one hardly needs enemies.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
save us from our friends.
a woman’s work is never done  The 
household tasks traditionally assigned to 
women—cooking, cleaning, and so on—
seem endless because they are repeated 
day after day: I was still ironing at mid-
night—a woman’s work is never done! The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in Thomas 
Tusser’s Hundred Good Points of Husbandry 
(1570) in the form “Some respite to 
husbands the weather doth send, but hus-
wives affaires have never none ende.”
Variant of this proverb: man’s work 
lasts till set of sun, woman’s work is never 
done.
a wonder lasts but nine days  Sensa-
tional events are usually entirely forgot-
ten after a short time: “These few days’ 
wonder will be quickly worn” (William 
Shakespeare, Henry VI (2:1). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded c. 1374 in Geoffrey 
Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde. The proverb 
is often referred to in the abbreviated 
form “a nine-day wonder.”
wonders will never cease!  Amazing 
things are constantly happening; often used 
ironically: I hear she actually admitted that she 
had made a mistake—wonders will never cease! 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1776 in T. 
Boaden’s Private Correspondence of D. Garrick.
Variant of this proverb: wonders 
never cease!
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the age of miracles is past.
a word is enough to the wise  See a 
word to the wise is sufficient.
a word spoken is past recalling  You 
cannot take back what you have said, so 
think carefully before speaking: I immedi-
ately regretted making such a hurtful remark, 
but a word spoken is past recalling. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1509 in 
the form “A word once spoken cannot be 
revoked,” but the sentiment it expresses is 
of ancient origin.
Variant of this proverb: words once 
spoken you can never recall.  Prov-
erb expressing similar meaning: think 
before you speak.
a word to the wise is suffi cient  It is 
not necessary to explain things in detail 
to intelligent people; often used when 
dropping a subtle hint or making a cryptic 
remark: He mentioned that four of the compa-
ny’s directors had just resigned, and a word to 
the wise is suffi cient—I’m going to invest my 
money elsewhere. The proverb is sometimes 
quoted in its Latin form, “Verbum sapienti 
sat est,” often shortened to “verb. sap.” It was 
fi rst recorded in English, with different 
wording, in 1570.
Variant of this proverb: a word is 
enough to the wise.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
a nod’s as good as a wink to a blind 
horse.
work before play  Tasks and chores must 
be completed before we can relax and 
enjoy ourselves: Work before play—you’re 
not going anywhere until all these dishes are 
washed and dried!
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
business before pleasure.
work expands so as to fi ll the time 
available for its completion  Any task, 
however small, will use up all the time 
 work expands so as to fi ll the time available for its completion
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   305 1/29/07   5:13:09 PM
306
available for it, because it is done more 
slowly than necessary, or because it gives 
rise to extra work: “I can’t believe it took you 
all afternoon to write one letter.” “Well, I didn’t 
have anything else to do, and work expands 
to fi ll the time available.” The proverb is 
known as Parkinson’s Law, named for the 
British historian C. Northcote Parkinson 
(1909–93), who coined it in 1955. A 
similar observation has been made about 
the tendency of objects to multiply until 
they occupy all the available space.
work never hurt anybody  Work will 
not do you any harm, and may do you 
some good; often said to those who are 
idle or lazy: When I complained to my son’s 
employer about the long hours he was expected 
to do, I got the curt reply, “Work never hurt 
anybody.” The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1879 in Dinah Maria Mulock’s Young 
Mrs. Jardine.
Variant of this proverb: hard work 
never hurt anybody.
the world is a stage and all the people in 
it actors  See all the world’s a stage.
the world runs on wheels  Daily events 
are unceasing and happen at a rapid pace: 
“The world runs all on wheels. All things 
therein move without intermission” (John 
Florio, translation of Montaigne, 1603). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1546 in 
John Heywood’s A Dialogue containing . . . 
the Proverbs in the English Tongue.
the worm will turn  See even a worm 
will turn.
worry is interest paid on trouble before 
it falls due  Do not add to the stress 
of everyday life by worrying about the 
future: You won’t catch me losing sleep over 
problems that may never happen—worry is 
interest paid on trouble before it falls due. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in 1924 in 
Judge Magazine.
worry kills more men than work  See 
it’s not work that kills, but worry.
worse things happen at sea  This pres-
ent misfortune, though regrettable, 
could have been worse: We shall have 
to give the show a miss, but never mind, 
worse things happen at sea. The proverb 
was first recorded in 1869 in Charles 
Spurgeon’s John Ploughman’s Talk. The 
proverb has long since acquired the 
status of a cliché.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: into every life a little rain must 
fall; it’s an ill wind that blows nobody 
any good.
the worst is yet to come  Things are 
not as bad as they can and will be: The 
mild weather we have been enjoying for 
the past few days does not mean winter is 
over—meteorologists are warning that the 
worst is yet to come. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in Tennyson’s poem “Sea 
Dreams” (1860): “His deeds yet live, 
the worst is yet to come./ Yet let your 
sleep for this one night be sound:/I do 
forgive him!”
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: the best is yet to be.
the worth of a thing is what it will 
bring  A thing is worth no more 
than somebody is willing to pay for it: 
She claimed that the painting was worth 
$100,000, but the worth of a thing is what it 
will bring, and it has just been sold at auction 
work never hurt anybody
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   306 1/29/07   5:13:09 PM
307
for less than half that fi gure. The proverb is 
of Latin or French origin in the form “A 
thing is worth as much as it can be sold 
for.” A rhyming version closer to the cur-
rent form occurs in Samuel Butler’s poem 
Hudibras (1664): “For what is worth in 
any thing,/But so much money as ’twill 
bring?”
 the worth of a thing is what it will bring
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   307 1/29/07   5:13:09 PM
308
years know more than books  Expe-
rience is more valuable than academic 
education: “Years know more than books,” 
said the old man, tapping the side of his nose. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in George 
Herbert, Outlandish Proverbs (1640).
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
experience is the best teacher; an 
YIDDISH PROVERBS
Yiddish proverbs rank among the most humorous and inventive anywhere in the world and 
have a unique worldly wise fl avor. Typical subjects include food, health, money, and death.
A man should stay alive if only out of curiosity
An imaginary ailment is worse than a disease
Better ten times ill than one time dead
Better the best of the worst than the worst of the best
Better to hear curses than to be pitied
A clock that stands still is better than one that goes wrong
Every man knows that he must die, but no one believes it
Every pot will fi nd its lid
Experience costs blood
God sends burdens, and shoulders
Health? Very nice! But where will we get potatoes?
He that lies on the ground cannot fall
He who has children will never die of starvation
If you eat your bagel you will have nothing in your pocket but the hole
If you stay at home you won’t wear out your shoes
If you want your dreams to come true, don’t sleep
Money buys everything but good sense
One does not live on joy or die of sorrow
Sleep faster —we need the pillows
When a thief kisses you, count your teeth
With money in your pocket, you are wise, handsome, and you sing well too
ååååå
y–zååå   å
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   308 1/29/07   5:13:09 PM
309
ounce of practice is worth a pound 
of precept.
yesterday will not be called again  It is 
impossible to relive the past: “Well, well 
(quoth she) what ever ye now saie, it is 
too late to call again yesterdaie” (J. Hey-
wood, A Dialogue containing . . . the Proverbs 
in the English Tongue, 1546). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in John Skelton, Mag-
nyfycence (1516).
Variant of this proverb: no man can 
call again yesterday.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: the mill cannot grind with the 
water that is past; time lost cannot 
be recalled.
you are what you eat  Your diet affects 
your physical and mental well-being; 
often used to promote health food or to 
condemn junk food: “If you are what you 
eat, the survivor of tonight’s world heavy-
weight championship fi ght will have been 
nourished either by sandwiches or sea-
weed” (New York Times, 1992). The proverb 
may be of German origin, but the senti-
ment it expresses occurs in the French 
 gastronome Anthelme Brillat-Savarin’s 
Physiologie du Goût (1825): “Dis-moi ce que 
tu manges, je te dirai ce que tu es [Tell me 
what you eat, and I will tell you what 
you are].”
you buy land, you buy stones; you buy 
meat, you buy bones  When you buy 
something, you must accept any undesir-
able elements that come with it: In the 
past, customers did not object to paying for 
the lumps of earth that clung to the fresh veg-
etables sold on market stalls, on the principle 
that “You buy land, you buy stones; you buy 
meat, you buy bones.” The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1670 in John Ray’s A Collec-
tion of English Proverbs.
you can catch more fl ies with honey 
than with vinegar  A polite or pleasant 
approach is more effective than rudeness 
or unpleasantness in dealing with people; 
sometimes used to recommend ingratiat-
ing behavior: “Ask his advice frequently, 
and thank him profusely for his wisdom 
and guidance. Remember that old adage 
‘You can catch more fl ies with honey than 
with vinegar’” (Washington Post, 1996). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1666 in 
G. Torriano’s Italian Proverbs. The word 
honey is sometimes replaced by sugar or 
molasses.
Variant of this proverb: honey catches 
more fl ies than vinegar.
you can drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back  It is 
impossible to change your own or another 
person’s character permanently, however 
hard you try; also used of attempts to 
change aspects of the natural world: The say-
ing “You can drive out nature with a pitchfork but 
she keeps on coming back” was never truer than in 
its horticultural sense, as any gardener who has 
done battle with a well-established weed will tell 
you. The proverb originated in the writings 
of the Roman poet Horace (65–8 b.c.).
Variant of this proverb: drive nature 
out of the door and it will return by the 
window.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
the leopard can’t change its spots.
you can fool some of the people all of 
the time, and all of the people some of 
the time, but you can’t fool all of the 
people all of the time  It is impossible 
to maintain a deception that will convince 
 you can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people some . . .
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   309 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
310
everybody: A few gullible people were taken 
in, but most soon realized that he was an impos-
tor—you can fool some of the people all of the 
time, and all of the people some of the time, but 
you cannot fool all of the people all of the time. 
The proverb is attributed to Abraham Lin-
coln in its current form, but the sentiment 
it expresses is of ancient origin.
you can have too much of a good 
thing  An excess of anything, however 
desirable or benefi cial it may be, is not 
good: “Modern liberals feel that a more 
tolerant society is a good thing, and they 
are right. Yet, it is possible to have too 
much of a good thing” (Washington Post, 
1995). The proverb was fi rst recorded in 
1611, but the sentiment it expresses is of 
earlier origin. In Shakespeare’s play As You 
Like It (4:1), Rosalind asks, “Why then, can 
one desire too much of a good thing?” The 
proverb is sometimes used in its opposite 
form, as in the following quotation from 
Casanova’s Memoirs (1828–38): “I prom-
ised to tell my tale if he thought it would 
not weary him, warning him that it would 
take two hours. ‘One could never have 
too much of a good thing,’ he was kind 
enough to say.”
Variant of this proverb: too much of 
a good thing is worse than none at all.
you can lead a horse to water, but you 
can’t make him drink  You can give 
somebody the opportunity to do some-
thing, but you cannot force him or her 
to do it: “If he is very strongly set against 
the work, perhaps it is better that he 
should take the opportunity there is now 
to break his articles . . . as you know 
you can take a horse to the water, but 
you can’t make him drink” (W. Somerset 
Maugham, Of Human Bondage, 1915). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1175 in Old 
English Homilies. The journalist Dorothy 
Parker (1893–1967), asked to make up a 
sentence containing the word horticulture, 
is said to have punningly replied, “You can 
lead a horticulture, but you can’t make 
her think.”
Variant of this proverb: you can take 
a horse to the water, but you can’t make 
him drink.
you can only die once  Death may be 
a frightening and unpleasant prospect or 
experience, but we can console ourselves 
with the fact that it will never be repeated; 
a fatalistic attitude, as in a life-threatening 
situation: I know it’s a dangerous pastime, but 
you can only die once, and nothing can beat the 
thrill of hurtling down an almost vertical slope 
at more than 100 m.p.h. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded c. 1435. It occurs in Shake-
speare’s play Henry IV, Part 2 (3:2; 1597) in 
the form “A man can die but once.”
you can run, but you can’t hide  It is 
impossible to evade capture, or some 
other undesirable experience, forever: 
They’ll have to face the consequences of their 
actions sooner or later—you can run, but you 
can’t hide. The proverb is attributed to the 
U.S. boxer Joe Louis (1914–81), who is 
said to have remarked, with reference to 
the speed and agility of his opponent Billy 
Conn, “He can run, but he can’t hide.”
you can take a horse to the water, but 
you can’t make him drink  See you can 
lead a horse to water, but you can’t 
make him drink.
you can take the boy out of the coun-
try, but you can’t take the country out 
of the boy  People never lose inborn 
you can have too much of a good thing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   310 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
311
or ingrained characteristics, even after a 
change of environment or situation: “Back 
in the good old days, when eager young 
rubes were descending upon the great 
metropolises in search of fame and for-
tune, it used to be said that you can take the 
boy out of the country but you can’t take 
the country out of the boy” (Washington 
Post, 1987). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1938. The words boy and country may be 
replaced by others, such as girl and city.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
nature passes nurture.
you can’t argue with success  Those who 
succeed must be doing things the right 
way: It’s a rather unconventional approach, but 
it works, and you can’t argue with success.
you can’t be all things to all men  It is 
impossible to do everything that every-
body wants: Politicians naturally want to win 
as many votes as possible, but you can’t be all 
things to all men. The proverb is of biblical 
origin: “To the weak became I as weak, 
that I might gain the weak: I am made all 
things to all men, that I might by all means 
save some” (1 Corinthians 9:22). It is also 
used in the form of the fi gurative phrase 
to be all things to all men.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a friend to all is a friend to 
none; you can’t please everybody.
you can’t beat a man at his own 
game  Do not try to compete with or 
outdo somebody in his or her own fi eld of 
activity, especially if you lack experience 
yourself: They tried to outwit the fraudsters 
with trickery, but soon learned that you can’t 
beat a man at his own game. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1756. It is more 
frequently encountered in the form of the 
fi gurative phrase to beat somebody at his or 
her own game. 
you can’t beat somebody with 
nobody  You cannot win, especially in 
politics, without support: Both candidates 
have been canvassing hard, on the basis that 
you can’t beat somebody with nobody.
you can’t be in two places at the same 
time  See one cannot be in two places 
at once.
you can’t build a church with stumbling 
blocks  Religion cannot be founded on 
doubt and uncertainty: It was questions like 
these that caused the faith of early believers to 
waver—you can’t build a church with stum-
bling blocks.
you can’t catch old birds with chaff 
Experienced people are not easily 
deceived: You can’t catch old birds with 
chaff—I’ve been in this job long enough to 
know when somebody is trying to pull a fast 
one. The proverb was fi rst recorded, with 
different wording, in 1481 in William 
Caxton, Reynard the Fox.
you can’t eat your cake and have it 
too  See you can’t have your cake and 
eat it too.
you can’t fi ght City Hall  Members of 
the general public cannot hope to win 
a dispute or battle with offi cialdom or 
bureaucracy: I thought of making a formal 
complaint, but there seemed little point—you 
can’t fi ght City Hall. The proverb dates 
from the late 17th century.
you can’t fl y with one wing  See a bird 
never flew on one wing.
 you can’t fl y with one wing
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   311 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
312
you can’t get a quart into a pint pot  You 
cannot fi t something into too small a 
space; also used more generally of any 
attempt to do the impossible: I would like 
to take more warm clothing, but you can’t get 
a quart into a pint pot, and this is the larg-
est suitcase I have. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1896.
you can’t get blood from a stone  It is 
impossible to get money, help, information, 
or pity from somebody who is unwilling 
or unable to give it to you: “Blood cannot 
be obtained from a stone, neither can any-
thing on account be obtained . . . from Mr. 
Micawber” (Charles Dickens, David Copper-
fi eld, 1850). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1666, in an Italian proverb collection.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t get 
blood from a turnip.
you can’t go home again  You cannot 
return to the past as you remember it: I 
have such happy memories of the time I spent 
there, but things are very different now, and 
you can’t go home again. The proverb was 
coined by the U.S. novelist Thomas Wolfe 
as the title of a book published posthu-
mously in 1940.
you can’t have it both ways  You must 
choose between two mutually exclusive 
alternatives: “But you can’t have it both 
ways. Either the much-vaunted ‘caring 
society’ is a myth, or a complete change 
in the value judgements of the people 
who govern television is needed” (Glasgow 
Herald, 1976). The proverb dates from the 
early 20th century.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: a door must be either shut or 
open; you can’t have your cake and 
eat it too.
you can’t have your cake and eat it 
too  You cannot do two mutually incom-
patible things at the same time: You can’t 
have your cake and eat it too—if you want 
your children to lead happy, independent lives 
you must accept that they will not always be 
there when you need them. The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1546 in John Heywood’s 
Dialogue of Proverbs.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t eat 
your cake and have it too.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t have it both ways.
you can’t keep the birds from fl ying 
over your head, but you can keep them 
from building a nest in your hair  When 
bad things happen—as they inevitably 
will—do not dwell on them or let them 
get to you: It was a devastating blow, but I 
knew that I must pick up the pieces and carry 
on—you can’t keep the birds from fl ying over 
your head, but you can keep them from build-
ing a nest in your hair.
you can’t lose what you never had  Fail-
ure to get something you want is not 
a real loss; also used with reference to 
the loss of something that somebody 
only thinks he or she has: “‘He has broke 
all; there’s half a line and a good hook 
lost.’ ‘I, and a good Trout too.’ ‘Nay, the 
Trout is not lost, for . . . no man can lose 
what he never had’” (Izaak Walton, The 
Compleat Angler, 1676). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded, with different wording, 
in Christopher Marlowe’s poem Hero and 
Leander, published posthumously in 1598.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t 
lose what you haven’t got.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
what you’ve never had you never 
miss.
you can’t get a quart into a pint pot
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   312 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
313
you can’t make an omelette without 
breaking eggs  Sacrifi ces have to be 
made in order to achieve a goal; often 
used to justify an act that causes loss, 
harm, or distress to others: “In war sol-
diers themselves sometimes cried, and 
their relations cried quite often. You 
can’t make an omelette without breaking 
eggs” (L. P. Hartley, The Hireling, 1957). 
Of French origin, the proverb was fi rst 
recorded in English in 1859.
you can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s 
ear  You cannot produce anything of good 
quality from poor raw material; often used 
of people: “The proverb says, ‘You can’t 
make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear.’ Well, 
I don’t know about that. I rather think you 
may, if you begin early in life. She has made 
a home out of that old boat, sir, that stone 
and marble couldn’t beat’ (Charles Dick-
ens, David Copperfi eld, 1850). The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1518 in A. Barclay’s 
Eclogues: “None can . . . make goodly silke 
of a gotes fl ece [goat’s fl eece].”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
garbage in, garbage out.
you can’t make bricks without straw 
You cannot produce anything without the 
necessary materials or resources: “You can 
only acquire really useful general ideas by 
fi rst acquiring particular ideas, and putting 
those particular ideas together. You cannot 
make bricks without straw” (Arnold Ben-
nett, Literary Taste, 1909). The proverb is of 
biblical origin: “Ye shall no more give the 
people straw to make brick, as heretofore: 
let them go and gather straw for them-
selves” (Exodus 5:7).
you can’t mix business and pleasure  See 
never mix business with pleasure.
you can’t please everybody  It is impos-
sible to do something that everybody 
will approve of: If we reduce the fuel taxes 
we’ll upset the environmentalist lobby, but you 
can’t please everybody. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1472 in E. Paston’s Letter, but 
the sentiment it expresses is of ancient 
origin
Variants of this proverb: you can’t 
please the whole world and his wife; those 
who please everybody please nobody.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t be all things to all men.
you can’t put an old head on young 
shoulders  It is unreasonable to expect 
young people to be as sensible or knowl-
edgeable as their elders: “‘This boy will 
investigate and report to me.’ . . . ‘Aunt 
Rachel, you are certainly very eccentric.’ 
‘I may be, but I am not often deceived.’ 
‘Well, I hope you won’t be this time. The 
boy seems to me a very good boy, but 
you can’t put an old head on young shoul-
ders’” (Horatio Alger, Driven from Home, 
1889). The proverb was fi rst recorded 
in 1591.
Variant of this proverb: there’s no 
putting old heads on young shoulders.
you can’t put a square peg in a round 
hole  Do not give somebody a job for 
which he or she is unsuited or unqualifi ed; 
also used of other situations in which a 
person is a misfi t: There’s no point in asking 
Jack to take over responsibility for the company 
website—he has no aptitude for or interest 
in computing, and you can’t put a square 
peg in a round hole. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in the early 19th century. It is 
more frequently encountered in the form 
of the cliché a square peg in a round hole (or 
a round peg in a square hole).
 you can’t put a square peg in a round hole
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   313 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
314
Variant of this proverb: you can’t put 
a round peg in a square hole.
you can’t put new wine in old bot-
tles  The introduction of new meth-
ods, ideas, items, or components into 
something old and well established—or 
old and decrepit—can have disastrous 
consequences: You can’t put new wine in old 
bottles, and you can’t expect today’s software to 
run on a computer that’s been gathering dust 
in the attic for the last 15 years. The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “Neither do men put 
new wine into old bottles: else the bottles 
break, and the wine runneth out, and the 
bottles perish” (Matthew 9:17).
Variant of this proverb: don’t put 
new wine in old bottles.
you can’t run with the hare and hunt 
with the hounds  You cannot support 
two opposing parties at the same time: 
“‘You ought to know best,’ he said, ‘but 
if you want a divorce it’s not very wise 
to go seeing her, is it? One can’t run with 
the hare and hunt with the hounds’” (John 
Galsworthy, The Forsyte Saga, 1922). The 
proverb dates from before 1449. Until the 
late 19th century it was most frequently 
used in the form of the fi gurative phrase to 
hold with the hare and run with the hound.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
no man can serve two masters.
you can’t serve God and mammon  A 
devout or virtuous way of life is incom-
patible with the pursuit of material 
wealth and possessions: “‘He hasn’t many 
friends—been too busy all his life to make 
any. He’s made heaps of money, though.’ 
‘Well, he thought that since he couldn’t 
serve God and Mammon he’d better stick 
to Mammon. . . . So he shouldn’t complain 
if he doesn’t fi nd Mammon very good 
company now’” (Lucy Maud Montgomery, 
Anne’s House of Dreams, 1917). The proverb 
is of biblical origin: “No man can serve 
two masters. . . . Ye cannot serve God 
and mammon” (Matthew 6:24). Mammon 
means “material wealth or possessions.”
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
no man can serve two masters.
you can’t shift an old tree without it 
dying  Relocation is not good for old 
people: We tried to persuade my mother to sell 
her house and move closer to us, but she refused. 
“You can’t shift an old tree without it dying,” 
she said. The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
with different wording, c. 1518.
Variant of this proverb: old trees 
can’t be transplanted.
you can’t step twice into the same river 
Things are constantly changing: Some people 
fi nd change exciting and stimulating, while 
others fi nd it unsettling and alarming, but the 
fact remains that you can’t step twice into the 
same river. The proverb is of ancient origin, 
occurring in the writings of the Greek phi-
losopher Heraclitus (fi fth century b.c.).
you can’t take it with you  You might 
as well spend your money while you are 
alive, because it can’t be carried with you 
into the next world: He decided to blow the 
remaining money on a world cruise, on the 
principle that you can’t take it with you. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1841.
Variant of this proverb: you can’t 
take it with you when you go.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
shrouds have no pockets.
you can’t teach an old dog new 
tricks  Old people are often unwilling 
you can’t put new wine in old bottles
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   314 1/29/07   5:13:10 PM
315
or unable to learn new skills or adopt 
new methods: “Since I’m 95 years old, it 
may be that ‘you can’t teach an old dog 
new tricks,’ but I’m just not comfort-
able with new appliances. They make me 
nervous and . . . never work for me” (New 
York Times, 1989). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1636, but the sentiment it 
expresses is of earlier origin.
Variant of this proverb: an old dog 
will learn no tricks.
Proverb expressing opposite mean-
ing: never too old to learn.
you can’t tell a book by its cover  See 
don’t judge a book by its cover.
you can’t unscramble eggs  Damage 
cannot be undone, and changes cannot be 
reversed: We must think very carefully before 
taking such a drastic step—the result could be 
disastrous, and you can’t unscramble eggs. The 
proverb is attributed to the U.S. fi nancier 
and art collector J. Pierpont Morgan 
(1837–1913).
Variant of this proverb: scrambled 
eggs can’t be unscrambled.
you can’t win ’em all  Nobody can hope 
to succeed every time: I thought she might 
be upset to learn that she hadn’t got the job, 
but she just shrugged her shoulders and said, 
“You can’t win ’em all.” The proverb dates 
from the mid-20th century.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you win some, you lose some.
you don’t get something for noth-
ing  Everything has to be paid for, directly 
or indirectly, in money or in kind: You don’t 
get something for nothing—I’ll expect you to 
return the favor one of these days. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in Phineas T. Barnum’s 
Struggles and Triumphs (1870): “When peo-
ple expect to get ‘something for nothing’ 
they are sure to be cheated.” The sentiment 
it expresses, however is of earlier origin; in 
his novel Sybil (1845), Benjamin Disraeli 
wrote, “To do nothing and get something 
formed a boy’s ideal of a manly career.”
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: nothing for nothing; there’s no 
such thing as a free lunch.
you get nothing for nothing  See noth-
ing for nothing.
you get what you pay for  The quality 
of goods and services is refl ected in their 
price—cheap things are usually inferior 
and expensive things are usually superior: 
He charges more than my last barber, but you 
get what you pay for, and he cuts my hair well.
you have to eat a bushel of dirt before 
you die  See we must eat a peck of dirt 
before we die.
you have to learn to crawl before you 
can walk  See we must learn to walk 
before we can run.
you have to take the bad with the 
good  See you have to take the bitter 
with the sweet.
you have to take the bitter with the 
sweet  You must endure the bad times 
if you want to enjoy the good times: In 
marriage, as in everything else, you have to 
take the bitter with the sweet. The proverb 
was fi rst recorded in 1546, but the sen-
timent it expresses is of earlier origin, 
occurring in Alexander Barclay’s The Ship 
of Fools (1509): “Take ye in good worth the 
swetnes with the sour.”
 you have to take the bitter with the sweet
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   315 1/29/07   5:13:11 PM
316
Variants of this proverb: always take 
the bitter with the better; you have to take 
the bad with the good.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
there’s no rose without a thorn.
you have to take the rough with the 
smooth  Everything has pleasant and 
unpleasant—or diffi cult and easy—
aspects: “‘Every profession,’ I said, ‘has 
got its dirty jobs. . . .’ ‘And will have,’ she 
said, ‘so long as professional men consent 
to do the dirty work of their employers.’ 
‘And where should I be, I should like to 
know,’ I said, ‘if I went on that lay? I’ve 
got to take the rough with the smooth.’ ” 
(John Galsworthy, The Freelands, 1915). 
The proverb was fi rst recorded c. 1400.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
he that would have eggs must endure 
the cackling of hens.
you’ll be damned if you do and damned 
if you don’t  In some situations it is 
impossible to do the right thing, because 
both of the options open to you will cause 
trouble or upset: “The toughest question I 
get is when people ask me what to do with 
policies of troubled companies. . . . Usually 
there’s a surrender charge involved to get 
out of the policy, so you’re damned if you 
do and damned if you don’t” (New York Times, 
1994). The proverb comes from Lorenzo 
Dow’s Refl ections on the Love of God (1836).
you must lose a fl y to catch a trout  See 
throw out a sprat to catch a 
 mackerel.
you must take two bears to live with 
you—bear and forbear  See bear and 
forbear.
you need more than dancing shoes to be 
a dancer  Doing something well is not 
just a matter of having the right equip-
ment: Buying her a new piano is a waste of 
money—she has no talent, and you need more 
than dancing shoes to be a dancer. The prov-
erb is recorded as a regional expression in 
the United States.
you never accumulate if you don’t spec-
ulate  See if you don’t speculate, you 
can’t accumulate.
you never get anything for nothing  See 
nothing for nothing.
you never know a man until you live 
with him  When you live with some-
body you fi nd out what he or she is 
really like: She believes that all couples 
should cohabit before they marry, on the 
principle that you never know a man until 
you live with him.
Variant of this proverb: you never 
know a man until you bed with him a 
winter and summer.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
come live with me and you’ll know 
me.
you never know what you can do until 
you try  People are often surprised to 
discover what they are capable of when 
they make an effort: I didn’t think I could 
walk that far, but you never know what you 
can do till you try. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1818 in William Cobbett’s 
Year’s Residence in America.
you never miss a slice from a cut loaf 
See a slice off a cut loaf isn’t missed.
you never miss the water till the well 
runs dry  We tend to take some things 
for granted, and become aware of their 
you have to take the rough with the smooth
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   316 1/29/07   5:13:11 PM
317
value only when they are no longer 
available: “Do not let your chances, like 
sunbeams pass you by;/For you never 
miss the water till the well runs dry” 
(Rowland Howard, You Never Miss the 
Water, 1876). The proverb dates from 
before 1628.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: blessings brighten as they take 
their flight; the cow knows not the 
value of her tail till she has lost it.
a young barber and an old physi-
cian  Youth is fi ne in a barber but unde-
sirable in a doctor: My aunt declined seeing 
the youthful locum on the grounds that “a 
young barber and an old physician” was best. 
The proverb was fi rst recorded in J. Sand-
ford, The Garden of Pleasure (1573).
Variant of this proverb: a young phy-
sician fattens the churchyard.
the young cock crows as he heard the 
old one  The young learn by the example 
of their elders. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in Alexander Barclay, Ship of 
Fools (1509): “The yonge cok lerneth to 
crowe hye of the olde.”
Variant of this proverb: the young 
pig grunts like the old sow.
young folks think old folks to be fools, 
but old folks know young folks to be 
fools  Young people think they are wiser 
than their elders, but the opposite is true: 
“‘Young folks always think old ones fools, 
they say.’ ‘Finish the adage, Sir, that old 
folks know young ones to be so, and then 
agree with me that it is a saying founded 
on prejudice” (Francis Edward Smedley, 
Frank Fairleigh, 1850). The proverb was 
fi rst recorded in 1577 in J. Grange’s 
Golden Aphroditis.
a young man married is a young man 
marred  It is not good to marry too 
young: “You may carve it on his tomb-
stone, you may cut it on his card,/That 
a young man married is a young man 
marred!” (Rudyard Kipling, The Story of 
the Gadsbys, 1888). First recorded in 1589, 
with reference to young women rather 
than young men, the proverb occurs in 
Shakespeare’s play All’s Well That Ends Well 
(2:3; 1602): “A young man married is a 
man that’s marr’d.”
young men forgive, old men never  See 
youth and old age will never agree.
young men may die, but old men must 
die  Death is a possibility at any age, but 
a certainty in old age: I fought in two wars 
and survived, but nobody lives forever—young 
men may die, but old men must die. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in this form 
in 1623, but the sentiment it expresses 
is of ancient origin, occurring in a story 
about a young Roman widow courted by 
an elderly man.
a young physician fattens the church-
yard  See a young barber and an old 
physician.
the young pig grunts like the old 
sow  See the young cock crows as he 
heard the old one.
young saint, old devil  Those who behave 
best when they are young are often those 
who behave worst when they are old: In 
later life he made up for the missed opportuni-
ties of his virtuous youth, indulging freely in 
all the excesses of the fl esh—a classic illustra-
tion of the saying “Young saint, old devil.” The 
proverb was fi rst recorded (Middle English 
 young saint, old devil
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   317 1/29/07   5:13:11 PM
318
Sermons) c. 1400, but with the implication 
that it was already in common use.
Variant of this proverb: a young 
saint, an old sinner.
you pays your money and you takes 
your choice  It is up to you which item, 
course of action, or theory you choose; 
used when there is an element of chance 
involved, or when there is little differ-
ence between the options available: Which 
of their stories is closest to the truth? You pays 
your money and you takes your choice. The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1846, as a 
cartoon caption in the British magazine 
Punch. It is sometimes occurs in the more 
grammatical form “You pay your money 
and you take your choice.”
Variant of this proverb: you pays 
your money and you takes your chance.
you’re only young once  Young people 
should take the opportunity to do all the 
things they will be unable to do when 
they’re older: He was in two minds about 
taking a year off to travel round the world, 
but I encouraged him, reminding him that 
you’re only young once. The proverbs fi rst 
recorded use is P. Wentworth’s In the Bal-
ance (1941).
you scratch my back, and I’ll scratch 
yours  Favors will be reciprocated; often 
used to imply corruption, or a covert 
arrangement between the parties con-
cerned: “In theory, racing’s addiction to 
the thin drip of a levy on betting turn-
over should mean that bookmakers and 
the sport’s administrators approach each 
other in a mutual spirit of: ‘You scratch 
my back, and I’ll scratch yours’” (Lon-
don Times, 1998). The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1704, in the form “Scratch 
me and I’ll scratch you,” but the senti-
ment it expresses is of ancient origin.
Proverbs expressing similar mean-
ing: one hand washes the other; one 
good turn deserves another.
you should know a man seven years 
before you stir his fi re  You should not 
be too familiar with people, or interfere 
in their domestic affairs, until you have 
known them for some time: “Let me get 
you another drink. . . . I know one ought 
to know people seven years to poke their 
fi res, but I believe it’s less for cocktails” 
(Angela Thirkell, Marling Hall, 1942). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1803 in C. 
Dibdin’s Professional Life.
you snooze, you lose  Those who fail to 
keep alert will lose out: “I felt sorry for 
his disappointment, but in this business 
it’s a case of you snooze, you lose.” The 
proverb appears to be of U.S. origin, dat-
ing from the late 20th century.
youth and old age will never agree  The 
young and the old see the world dif-
ferently: “Youthe and elde is often at 
debaat” (Geoffrey Chaucer, The Canter-
bury Tales, c. 1387). It appears in William 
Shakespeare’s The Passionate Pilgrim in the 
form “Crabbed age and youth cannot live 
together.”
Variant of this proverb: young men 
forgive, old men never.
youth must be served Young people 
should be allowed to have their own 
way, helped, or treated with forbearance: 
Youth must be served, but we have to draw the 
line somewhere, and acts of wanton vandalism 
cannot be tolerated. The proverb was fi rst 
recorded in 1829 in P. Egan’s Boxiana.
you pays your money and you takes your choice
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   318 1/29/07   5:13:11 PM
319
Variant of this proverb: youth will 
be served.
youth will have its fl ing  Young people 
should be forgiven for their excesses or 
improprieties: “I pray you, pardon me, ex-
Pirate King!/Peers will be peers, and youth 
will have its fl ing” (W. S. Gilbert and Arthur 
Sullivan, The Pirates of Penzance, 1879). The 
proverb was fi rst recorded in 1562.
Variant of this proverb: youth will 
have its course.
you’ve made your bed, now lie in it  See 
as you make your bed, so you must 
lie in-it.
you win some, you lose some  Successes 
and failures tend to balance one another 
overall; used to indicate or advocate a 
nonchalant attitude to defeat: Hearing 
that he had not been successful in gaining the 
contract, he sighed with resignation, “You win 
some, you lose some. I guess there’ll always be a 
next time.” The proverb was fi rst recorded, 
in its variant form, in 1897, in Rudyard 
Kipling’s Captains Courageous.
Variant of this proverb: you win a 
few, you lose a few.
Proverb expressing similar meaning: 
you can’t win ’em all.
zeal without knowledge is a runaway 
horse  Uninformed enthusiasm will only 
lead to disaster. The proverb is ultimately 
of biblical origin, appearing at Romans 
10:2 in the form: “They have a zeal of 
God, but not according to knowledge.”
Variant of this proverb: zeal without 
knowledge is the sister of folly.
 zeal without knowledge is a runaway horse
001-319_DictProverbs_2e.indd   319 1/29/07   5:13:11 PM
320
The nouns, adjectives, and verbs of the 
proverbs are indexed under the base form 
(the singular noun or the infi nitive of the 
verb), thus “Children should be seen and 
not heard” is indexed under child, see, and 
hear, and “Easier said than done” is indexed 
under easy, say, and do. The same principle 
applies to verb forms used as nouns and 
adjectives (such as those ending in -ing and 
-ed): for blessing and blessed look under bless, 
for lining look under line, for willing look 
under will, for broke look under break, and 
for shorn look under shear. Other derived 
forms, such as nouns ending in -er and 
adverbs ending in -ly, have their own key-
words, for example, loser and badly. Note 
that common words such as thing, man, 
all, have, and do are not always indexed. 
Hyphenated forms and two-word com-
pounds are indexed under their separate 
elements, thus “Beauty is only skin deep” 
is listed under beauty, skin, and deep, and 
“Don’t jump from the frying pan into the 
fi re” is under jump, fry, pan, and fi re.
In d e x  b y  Ke y 
Wo r d
A  Who says A must say B
abandon  Rats abandon a sinking ship 
See rats desert a sinking ship
abhor  nature abhors a vacuum
above  Caesar’s wife must be above 
 suspicion
nobody is above the law
abroad  go abroad and you’ll hear news 
of home
absence  absence is the mother of dis-
illusion
absence makes the heart grow fonder
a little absence does much good
absent  he who is absent is always in 
the wrong
absolute  power corrupts, and absolute 
power corrupts absolutely
absolutely  power corrupts, and abso-
lute power corrupts absolutely
abundance  out of the abundance of 
the heart the mouth speaks See out 
of the fullness of the heart the mouth 
speaks
accident  accidents will happen in the 
best-regulated families
account  there’s no accounting for 
tastes
accumulate  if you don’t speculate, you 
can’t accumulate
accuse  accusing the times is but excus-
ing ourselves
he who excuses himself accuses himself
never ask pardon before you are 
accused
accuse  qui s’excuse, s’accuse See he who 
excuses himself accuses himself
accuser  a guilty conscience needs no 
accuser
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd320   320 1/29/07   5:24:00 PM
ache  the tongue ever turns to the ach-
ing tooth See the tongue always returns 
to the sore tooth
acorn  even a blind pig occasionally 
picks up an acorn
great oaks from little acorns grow
action  action is worry’s worst enemy
actions speak louder than words
action without thought is like shooting 
without aim
a common danger causes common action
actor  the world is a stage and all the 
people in it actors See all the world’s 
a stage
ad  big fl eas have little fl eas upon their 
backs to bite ’em, and little fl eas have 
lesser fl eas, and so ad infi nitum
Adam  when Adam delved and Eve span, 
who was then the gentleman?
addle  as good be an addled egg as an 
idle bird
admire  admiration is the daughter of 
ignorance
advantage  the devil can quote scrip-
ture to his own advantage See the devil 
can cite scripture for his purpose
adventure  adventures are to the adven-
turous
adventurous  adventures are to the 
adventurous
adversity  adversity makes strange bed-
fellows
a dose of adversity is often as needful as a 
dose of medicine
prosperity discovers vice; adversity, vir-
tue
advice  ask advice, but use your own 
common sense
nothing is given so freely as advice
affair  there’s a tide in the affairs of 
man
affect  small things affect light minds 
See little things please little minds
afraid  he who rides a tiger is afraid to 
dismount
Africa  always something new out of 
Africa
aft  the best-laid schemes of mice and 
men gang aft a-gley
afterward  shoot fi rst and ask questions 
afterward
again  what has happened once can hap-
pen again
yesterday will not be called again
against  strive not against the stream
Agamemnon  brave men lived before 
Agamemnon
age  age before beauty
the age of miracles is past
the golden age was never the present age
an idle youth, a needy age
with age comes wisdom
youth and old age will never agree
a-gley  the best-laid schemes of mice 
and men gang aft a-gley
agree  agree, for the law is costly
beauty and honesty seldom agree
birds in their little nests agree
history is a fable agreed upon
two of a trade never agree
youth and old age will never agree
agreement  an ill agreement is better 
than a good judgment
ahead   quit while you are ahead
aim  action without thought is like 
shooting without aim
air  don’t air your dirty linen in public 
See don’t wash your dirty linen in 
public
akin  cleanliness is akin to godliness See 
cleanliness is next to godliness
pity is akin to love
alcohol  alcohol will preserve anything 
but a secret
alibi  corruption will fi nd a dozen alibis 
for its evil deeds
Index by Key Word
321
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd321   321 1/29/07   5:24:00 PM
alike  great minds think alike
share and share alike
alive  if you want to live and thrive, let 
the spider run alive
all  all fi sh are not caught with fl ies
all’s well that ends well
all things will pass See this, too, shall 
pass
the end crowns all See the end crowns 
the work
every man for himself and God for us all
a friend to all is a friend to none
hear all, see all, say nowt
it’ll all be the same in a hundred years
it’ll all come out in the wash
it’s all grist for the mill See all is grist that 
comes to the mill
it’s all in a day’s work
it takes all kinds of people to make a 
world
a jack of all trades is master of none
mom is the measure of all things
tell not all you know, nor do all you can
the third time pays for all See the third 
time is the charm
to know all is to forgive all
you can fool some of the people all of 
the time, and all of the people some of 
the time, but you can’t fool all of the 
people all of the time
you can’t be all things to all men
you can’t win ’em all
allow  every dog is allowed one bite
two’s a couple, three’s a crowd, four’s too 
many, and fi ve’s not allowed See two’s 
company, three’s a crowd
alloy  no joy without alloy See no joy 
without annoy
alone  he travels fastest who travels 
alone
laugh and the world laughs with you, 
weep and you weep alone
leave well enough alone
misfortunes seldom come alone See mis-
fortunes never come singly
a wise man is never less alone than when 
alone
alter  circumstances alter cases
always  always something new out of 
Africa
once a priest, always a priest
once a thief, always a thief
America  America is a tune: it must be 
sung together
the business of America is business
never sell America short
what’s good for General Motors is good 
for America
American  good Americans, when they 
die, go to Paris
nobody ever went broke underestimat-
ing the intelligence of the American 
people
amor  Amor vincit omnia See love con-
quers all
an  if and an spoils many a good charter
if ifs and ans were pots and pans, there’d 
be no work for tinkers
ancestor  most people consider thrift a 
fi ne virtue in ancestors
angel  fools rush in where angels fear 
to tread
anger  anger improves nothing but the 
arch of a cat’s back
anger without power is folly
never let the sun go down on your 
anger
angry  a hungry man is an angry man
animal  all animals are equal, but some 
are more equal than others
never work with children or animals
annoy  no joy without annoy
another  another day, another dollar
he who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day
tomorrow is another day
Index by Key Word
322
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd322   322 1/29/07   5:24:01 PM
answer  ask a silly question and you get 
a silly answer
a civil question deserves a civil answer
fools ask questions that wise men cannot 
answer
silence is the best answer to the stupid See 
silence is the fi ttest reply to folly
a soft answer turns away wrath
anvil  the church is an anvil which has 
worn out many hammers
anything  if anything can go wrong, it 
will
you never get anything for nothing See 
nothing for nothing
apace  ill news comes apace See bad 
news travels fast
ill weeds grow apace
ape  an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, 
though they be clad in silk or scarlet
old maids lead apes in hell
appear  be what you appear to be See be 
what you would seem to be
speak of the devil and he always appears
appearance  appearances are deceiving
judge not according to appearances
appetite  appetite comes with eating
apple  an apple a day keeps the doctor 
away
the apple never falls far from the tree
the rotten apple spoils the barrel
small choice in rotten apples
April  April showers bring May fl owers
arch  anger improves nothing but the 
arch of a cat’s back
architect  every man is the architect of 
his own fortune
are  See be
argue  when you argue with a fool, 
make sure he isn’t similarly engaged
you can’t argue with success
argument  the only thing a heated argu-
ment ever produced is coolness
arm  kings have long arms
stretch your arm no further than your 
sleeve will reach
army  an army marches on its stomach
around  prosperity is just around the 
corner
what goes around, comes around
arrive  it’s better to travel hopefully 
than to arrive
ars  ars est celare artem See the best art 
conceals art
ars longa, vita brevis See art is long and life 
is short
art  all arts are brothers, each is a light 
to the other
art is long and life is short
art is power
the art of being a parent consists of sleep-
ing when the baby isn’t looking
the best art conceals art
artem  ars est celare artem See the best art 
conceals art
ash  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; 
creep under the thorn, it can save you 
from harm
ask  ask, and it shall be given you; seek, 
and ye shall fi nd; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you
ask advice, but use your own common 
sense
ask a silly question and you get a silly 
answer
ask me no questions and I’ll tell you no lies
he that will thrive must fi rst ask his wife
never ask pardon before you are accused
shoot fi rst and ask questions afterward
ass  better be the head of an ass than the 
tail of a horse See better be the head of 
a dog than the tail of a lion
astray  the best-laid schemes of mice 
and men oft go astray See the best-laid 
schemes of mice and men gang aft 
a-gley
Index by Key Word
323
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd323   323 1/29/07   5:24:01 PM
attack  attack is the best form of defense 
See the best defense is a good offense
attract  like attracts like
opposites attract
authority  a traveler may lie with 
authority
autres  autres temps, autres moeurs See 
other times, other manners
available  work expands so as to fi ll the 
time available for its completion
avoid  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the 
fl ash; creep under the thorn, it can save 
you from harm
criticism is something you can avoid by 
saying nothing, doing nothing, and 
being nothing
avoidance  avoidance is the only remedy
away  away goes the devil when he 
fi nds the door shut against him
blue are the hills that are far away
when the cat’s away, the mice will play
aye  marry in May, rue for aye
B  who says A must say B
babe  out of the mouths of babes and 
sucklings come great truths
baby  the art of being a parent consists 
of sleeping when the baby isn’t look-
ing
don’t throw out the baby with the bath-
water
back  anger improves nothing but the 
arch of a cat’s back
the back door robs the house See a postern 
door makes a thief
big fl eas have little fl eas upon their backs 
to bite ’em, and little fl eas have lesser 
fl eas, and so ad infi nitum
God makes the back to the burden
it’s the last straw that breaks the camel’s 
back
step on a crack, break your mother’s 
back
what’s got over the devil’s back is spent 
under his belly
you scratch my back and I’ll scratch 
yours
backyard  a cock is mighty in his own 
backyard See every cock will crow 
upon his own dunghill
the grass is always greener in some-
body else’s backyard See the grass is 
always greener on the other side of 
the fence
bad  all bad things come in threes See 
things come in threes
a bad excuse is better than none
a bad husband makes a bad wife See a good 
husband makes a good wife
bad money drives out good
bad news travels fast
a bad penny always turns up
a bad workman quarrels with his tools
don’t throw good money after bad
fi re is a good servant but a bad master
give a dog a bad name and hang him
a good horse cannot be of a bad color
good riddance to bad rubbish
the good seaman is known in bad 
weather
hard cases make bad law
he comes too early who brings bad news
hope is a good breakfast but a bad supper
nothing so bad but it might have been 
worse
one bad apple spoils the lot See the rotten 
apple spoils the barrel
a poor excuse is better than none See a bad 
excuse is better than none
a preacher’s son is often bad See clergy-
men’s sons always turn out badly
the receiver is as bad as the thief See if 
there were no receivers, there would 
be no thieves
a secret is either too good to keep or too 
bad not to tell
Index by Key Word
324
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd324   324 1/29/07   5:24:01 PM
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, 
bad luck you’ll have all the day
there’s good and bad in everything
there’s no such thing as bad weather, only 
the wrong clothes
three moves are as bad as a fi re
a whistling girl and a crowing hen always 
come to the same bad end See a whis-
tling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men
you have to take the bad with the good 
See you have to take the bitter with 
the sweet
badly  clergymen’s sons always turn out 
badly
bag  an empty bag cannot stand See an 
empty sack cannot stand upright
there’s many a good cock come out of a 
tattered bag
bait  fi sh or cut bait
the hook without bait catches no fi sh
bake  as you bake, so shall you brew
as you brew, so shall you bake See as you 
brew, so shall you drink
barber  a young barber and an old physi-
cian
bare  there goes more to marriage than 
four bare legs in a bed
barefoot  he that waits for dead men’s 
shoes may go a long time barefoot See 
it’s ill waiting for dead men’s shoes
the shoemaker’s child always goes bare-
foot
bargain  it takes two to make a bargain
bark  a barking dog never bites
the dogs bark, but the caravan goes on
why keep a dog and bark yourself?
barn  don’t shut the barn door after the 
horse is stolen
a jackass can kick a barn door down, but it 
takes a carpenter to build one
barrel  an empty barrel makes the most 
noise See empty vessels make the most 
sound
the rotten apple spoils the barrel
basket  don’t put all your eggs in one 
basket
bathwater  don’t throw out the baby 
with the bathwater
baton  every soldier has the baton of a 
fi eld-marshal in his knapsack
battalion  providence is always on the 
side of the big battalions
battle  a good beginning is half the 
battle
he who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day, but he that is in battle 
slain will never rise to fi ght again See he 
who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day
it’s better to lose the battle and win the 
war
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle 
to the strong
bawl  a bawling cow soon forgets her 
own calf See a bellowing cow soon 
forgets her calf
bayonet  a bayonet is a weapon with a 
worker at each end
be  the best is yet to be
be what you would seem to be
the future ain’t what it used to be
what will be, will be
you are what you eat
bear (n.)  you must take two bears to 
live with you—bear and forbear See 
bear and forbear
bear (v.)  bear and forbear
beware of Greeks bearing gifts
a clear conscience can bear any trouble 
we all have our cross to bear
beard  it’s merry in hall when beards 
wag all
Index by Key Word
325
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd325   325 1/29/07   5:24:01 PM
beast  music has charms to soothe the 
savage beast See music hath charms to 
soothe the savage breast
beat  if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em
it’s easy to fi nd a stick to beat a dog
might beats right See might makes right
you can’t beat a man at his own game
you can’t beat somebody with nobody
beautiful  big is beautiful
small is beautiful
beauty  age before beauty
beauty and honesty seldom agree
beauty draws with a single hair
beauty is a good letter of introduction
beauty is but a blossom
beauty is in the eye of the beholder
beauty is no inheritance
beauty is only skin deep
beauty is truth, truth beauty
fancy passes beauty
grace will last, beauty will blast
a thing of beauty is a joy forever
bed  as you make your bed, so you must 
lie in it
early to bed and early to rise, makes a man 
healthy, wealthy, and wise
life is no bed of roses
there goes more to marriage than four 
bare legs in a bed
you never know a man until you bed with 
him a winter and summer See you never 
know a man until you live with him
bedfellow  adversity makes strange bed-
fellows
politics makes strange bedfellows
bee  where bees are, there is honey
beer  he that drinks beer, thinks beer
life isn’t all beer and skittles
before  pride goes before a fall
beforehand  pay beforehand was never 
well served
beg  give a loaf and beg a slice
beget  length begets loathing
like begets like See like breeds like
love begets love
money begets money
one business begets another
one lie begets another See one lie leads 
to another
success begets success See success breeds 
success
beggar  beggars can’t be choosers
give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it to 
death
if wishes were horses, beggars would ride
set a beggar on horseback, and he’ll ride 
to the devil
sue a beggar and catch a louse
begin  charity begins at home
equality begins in the grave
fi sh begin to stink at the head See a fi sh 
stinks from the head
a good beginning is half the battle
a good beginning makes a good ending
he that would the daughter win, must 
with the mother fi rst begin
he who begins many things, fi nishes but 
few
he who would climb the ladder must 
begin at the bottom
an ill beginning makes an ill ending
a journey of a thousand miles begins with 
one step
life begins at forty
the sooner begun, the sooner done
well begun is half done
when things are at the worst they begin 
to mend
behind  always in a hurry, always 
behind
behind every great man there is a great 
woman
if two ride on a horse, one must ride 
behind
beholder  beauty is in the eye of the 
beholder
Index by Key Word
326
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd326   326 1/29/07   5:24:01 PM
belfry  the devil gets up to the belfry by 
the vicar’s skirts
believe  believe only half of what you 
see and nothing you hear
believing has a core of unbelieving
a liar is not believed when he tells the 
truth
seeing is believing
believer  a believer is a songless bird 
in a cage
bellow  a bellowing cow soon forgets 
her calf
belly  the eye is bigger than the belly
a growing youth has a wolf in his belly 
See a growing youth has a wolf in his 
stomach
hungry bellies have no ears See a hungry 
stomach has no ears
what’s got over the devil’s back is spent 
under his belly
belong  conscience gets a lot of credit 
that belongs to cold feet
to the victor belong the spoils
below  no man is above the law, and no 
man is below it See nobody is above 
the law
bend  as the twig is bent, so is the tree 
inclined
best  accidents will happen in the best-
regulated families
all’s for the best in the best of all possible 
worlds
the best art conceals art
the best defense is a good offense
the best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, 
and Dr. Merryman
the best is the enemy of the good
the best is yet to be
the best-laid schemes of mice and men 
gang aft a-gley
the best of friends must part
the best of men are but men at best
the best place for criticism is in front of 
your mirror
the best things come in small packages
the best things in life are free
the best way to get even is to forget
a dog is a man’s best friend
don’t shoot the pianist, he’s doing his 
best
east, west, home’s best
few words are best
God takes soonest those he loves best
a good example is the best sermon
the good is the enemy of the best
good to forgive, best to forget See forgive 
and forget
he laughs best who laughs last See he who 
laughs last, laughs longest
he lives longest who lives best See he lives 
long who lives well
he who laughs last, laughs best See he who 
laughs last, laughs longest
honesty is the best policy
hope for the best and prepare for the 
worst
hunger is the best sauce
it’s best to be off with the old love before 
you are on with the new
it’s best to be on the safe side See it’s bet-
ter to be on the safe side
laughter is the best medicine
a man’s best reputation for the future is 
his record of the past
old friends and old wine are best
an old poacher makes the best game-
keeper
put your best foot forward
revenge is a dish best eaten cold
second thoughts are best
silence is the best answer to the stupid See 
silence is the fi ttest reply to folly
that government is best which governs 
least
welcome is the best cheer
Index by Key Word
327
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd327   327 1/29/07   5:24:02 PM
why should the devil have all the best 
tunes?
bestow  fl owers leave fragrance in the 
hand that bestows them
better  always take the bitter with the 
better See you have to take the bitter 
with the sweet
better a big fi sh in a little pond than a little 
fi sh in a big pond
better a dinner of herbs where love is than 
a stalled ox where hate is
better a good cow than a cow of a good 
kind
better a little fi re to warm us than a big 
one to burn us
better be an old man’s darling than a 
young man’s slave
better be envied than pitied
better be fi rst in a village than second in 
Rome
better be out of the world than out of 
the fashion
better be the head of a dog than the tail 
of a lion
better death than dishonor
better late than never
better luck next time
better one house spoiled than two
better safe than sorry
the better the day, the better the deed
better the devil you know than the devil 
you don’t know
better to wear out than to rust out
discretion is the better part of valor
example is better than precept
a good name is better than precious 
ointment
the gray mare is the better horse
half a loaf is better than no bread
the half is better than the whole
it’s better to be an hour too early than a 
minute too late
it’s better to be born lucky than rich
it’s better to be happy than wise
it’s better to be on the safe side
it’s better to be right than in the majority
it’s better to die on your feet than live on 
your knees
it’s better to give than to receive
it’s better to laugh than to cry
it’s better to light one candle than curse 
the darkness
it’s better to lose the battle and win 
the war
it’s better to travel hopefully than to arrive
learning is better than house or land
a live dog is better than a dead lion
prevention is better than cure
something is better than nothing
a tale grows better in the telling See a tale 
never loses in the telling
’tis better to have loved and lost, than 
never to have loved at all
two heads are better than one
wisdom is better than rubies
beware  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; 
creep under the thorn, it can save you 
from harm
beware of Greeks bearing gifts
let the buyer beware
big  better a big fi sh in a little pond than 
a little fi sh in a big pond
better a little fi re to warm us than a big 
one to burn us
big fi sh eat little fi sh
big fl eas have little fl eas upon their backs 
to bite ’em, and little fl eas have lesser 
fl eas, and so ad infi nitum
the bigger they are, the harder they fall
big is beautiful
the eye is bigger than the belly
if you can’t run with the big dogs, stay 
under the porch
the larger the body, the bigger the heart
little pitchers have big ears
Index by Key Word
328
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd328   328 1/29/07   5:24:02 PM
the mother of mischief is no bigger than a 
midge’s wing
providence is always on the side of the big 
battalions
small leaks sink big ships See little leaks 
sink the ship
speak softly and carry a big stick
billet  every bullet has its billet
bind  safe bind, safe fi nd
bird  as good be an addled egg as an 
idle bird
a believer is a songless bird in a cage
a bird in the hand is worth two in the 
bush
a bird never fl ew on one wing
birds in their little nests agree
birds of a feather fl ock together
the early bird catches the worm
fi ne feathers make fi ne birds
an ill bird lays an ill egg
in vain the net is spread in the sight of 
the bird
it’s an ill bird that fouls its own nest
little birds that can sing and won’t sing 
must be made to sing
pigs may fl y, but they are very unlikely 
birds See if a pig had wings, it might fl y
there are no birds in last year’s nest
you can’t catch old birds with chaff
you can’t keep the birds from fl ying over 
your head, but you can keep them from 
building a nest in your hair
birth  birth is much but breeding more
one for sorrow; two for mirth; three for a 
wedding; four for a birth
bis  bis dat qui cito dat See he gives twice 
who gives quickly
bishop  nobody is born learned; bishops 
are made of men
bit  the biter is sometimes bit
every little bit helps See every little helps
bitch  the hasty bitch bringeth forth 
blind whelps
life’s a bitch, and then you die
bite  a barking dog never bites
big fl eas have little fl eas upon their backs 
to bite ’em, and little fl eas have lesser 
fl eas, and so ad infi nitum
a bleating sheep loses a bite
dead men don’t bite
don’t bite off more than you can chew
don’t bite the hand that feeds you
every dog is allowed one bite
if you can’t bite, never show your teeth
once bitten, twice shy
take a hair of the dog that bit you
when a dog bites a man, that is not news; 
but when a man bites a dog, that is 
news
biter  the biter is sometimes bit
bitter  you have to take the bitter with 
the sweet
black  all cats are black at night See all 
cats are gray in the dark
the devil is not as black as he is painted
the pot calls the kettle black
there’s a black sheep in every fl ock
two blacks don’t make a white See two 
wrongs don’t make a right
blame  a bad workman blames his tools 
See a bad workman quarrels with his 
tools
common fame is seldom to blame
blast  grace will last, beauty will blast
bleat  a bleating sheep loses a bite
bleed  paper bleeds little
bless  blessed are the dead that the rain 
rains on
blessed are they who expect nothing, for 
they shall not be disappointed
blessed is the bride that the sun shines 
on See happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on
blessings brighten as they take their fl ight
happy is the bride that the sun shines on, 
blessed is the corpse that the rain falls 
Index by Key Word
329
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd329   329 1/29/07   5:24:02 PM
on See happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on
it’s more blessed to give than to receive 
See it’s better to give than to receive
blind  blind chance sweeps the world 
along
a blind man’s wife needs no paint
a deaf husband and a blind wife are always 
a happy couple
even a blind pig occasionally picks up an 
acorn
the hasty bitch bringeth forth blind 
whelps
if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch
in the country of the blind, the one-eyed 
man is king
justice is blind
love is blind
love is blind; friendship closes its eyes
men are blind in their own cause
a nod’s as good as a wink to a blind horse
nothing so bold as a blind mare
there are none so blind as those who will 
not see
bliss  ignorance is bliss
blithe  the child that is born on the Sab-
bath day is bonny and blithe and good 
and gay
block  the only difference between 
stumbling blocks and stepping-stones 
is the way you use them
you can’t build a church with stumbling 
blocks
blood  blood is thicker than water
the blood of the martyrs is the seed of 
the church
blood will have blood
blood will tell
you can’t get blood from a stone
blossom  beauty is but a blossom
blow  if wind blows on you through a 
hole, say your prayers and mind your 
soul
it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any 
good
the north wind doth blow and we shall 
have snow
straws show which way the wind blows
blue  blue are the hills that are far away
true blue will never stain
blush  blushing is a sign of grace
paper does not blush
boat  don’t rock the boat
little boats should stay close to shore
a rising tide lifts all boats
body  corporations have neither bodies 
to be punished nor souls to be damned
the larger the body, the bigger the heart
boil  a watched pot never boils
bold  fortune favors the bold See fortune 
favors the brave
nothing so bold as a blind mare
bolt  a fool’s bolt is soon shot
it’s too late to shut the stable door after 
the horse has bolted See don’t shut the 
barn door after the horse is stolen
bond  a man’s word is as good as his 
bond
bone  beauty is only skin-deep, but 
goodness goes to the bone See beauty 
is only skin-deep
charity is not a bone you throw to a dog 
but a bone you share with a dog
a dog that will fetch a bone will carry a 
bone
a good dog deserves a good bone
hard words break no bones
the nearer the bone, the sweeter the fl esh
sticks and stones may break my bones, but 
names will never hurt me
what’s bred in the bone will come out in 
the fl esh
while two dogs are fi ghting for a bone, a 
third runs away with it
you buy land, you buy stones; you buy 
meat, you buy bones
Index by Key Word
330
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd330   330 1/29/07   5:24:02 PM
bonny  the child that is born on the Sab-
bath day is bonny and blithe and good 
and gay
bonum  de mortuis nil nisi bonum See 
never speak ill of the dead
book  a book is like a garden carried in 
the pocket
books and friends should be few and 
good
cards are the devil’s books See cards are 
the devil’s tools
don’t judge a book by its cover
a great book is a great evil
a house without books is like a room 
without windows
years know more than books
boot  the boot is on the other foot See 
the shoe is on the other foot
don’t judge a man until you have walked a 
mile in his boots
a lie can go around the world and back again 
while the truth is lacing up its boots
born  the child that is born on the Sab-
bath day is bonny and blithe and good 
and gay
from the day you were born till you ride 
in a hearse, there’s nothing so bad but 
it might have been worse See nothing so 
bad but it might have been worse
if you’re born to be hanged, then you’ll 
never be drowned
it’s better to be born lucky than rich
the man who is born in a stable is not a 
horse
nobody is born learned; bishops are made 
of men
poets are born, not made
there’s a sucker born every minute
borrow  the early man never borrows 
from the late man
he that goes a-borrowing, goes a-sorrowing
borrower  neither a borrower nor a 
lender be
both  you can’t have it both ways
bottle  you can’t put new wine in old 
bottles
bottom  every tub must stand on its 
own bottom
he who would climb the ladder must 
begin at the bottom
truth lies at the bottom of a well
bought  See buy
bound  keep a thing seven years and 
it’s bound to come in handy See keep 
a thing seven years and you’ll fi nd a 
use for it
bowl  life is just a bowl of cherries
bowls  those who play at bowls must 
look out for rubbers
boy  all work and no play makes Jack a 
dull boy
boys seldom make passes at girls who 
wear glasses
boys will be boys
never send a boy to do a man’s job
one for sorrow, two for joy, three for a 
girl, and four for a boy See one for sor-
row; two for mirth; three for a wed-
ding; four for a birth
two boys are half a boy, and three boys are 
no boy at all
you can take the boy out of the country 
but you can’t take the country out of 
the boy
brain  an idle brain is the devil’s work-
shop
use brains not brawn See wisdom goes 
beyond strength
branch  all arts are one, all branches on 
one tree See all arts are brothers, each 
is a light to the other
the highest branch is not the safest roost
brass  where there’s muck there’s brass
brave  brave men lived before 
Agamemnon
calamity is the touchstone of a brave 
mind
Index by Key Word
331
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd331   331 1/29/07   5:24:02 PM
the coward dies a thousand deaths, the 
brave but one See cowards die many 
times before their death
fortune favors the brave
none but the brave deserve the fair
Robin Hood could brave all weathers but 
a thaw wind
too many chiefs and not enough braves 
See too many chiefs and not enough 
Indians
Bray  the vicar of Bray will be vicar of 
Bray still
bread  bread always falls buttered side 
down
bread is the staff of life
half a loaf is better than no bread
man does not live by bread alone
whose bread I eat, his song I sing
break  hard words break no bones
if it ain’t broke, don’t fi x it
if it takes two to make a bargain, it takes 
two to break it See it takes two to make 
a bargain
if it were not for hope, the heart would 
break
ignorance of the law is no excuse for 
breaking it See ignorance of the law is 
no excuse
it’s the last straw that breaks the camel’s 
back
never give a sucker an even break
nobody ever went broke underestimat-
ing the intelligence of the American 
people
obey orders, if you break owners
a pitcher that goes to the well too often is 
broken at last See the pitcher will go to 
the well once too often
promises, like piecrust, are made to be 
broken
rules are made to be broken
step on a crack, break your mother’s 
back
sticks and stones may break my bones, but 
words will never hurt me
the thread breaks where it is weakest
time is the rider that breaks youth
you can’t make an omelette without 
breaking eggs
breakfast  hope is a good breakfast but 
a bad supper
an hour before breakfast is worth two the 
rest of the day See an hour in the morn-
ing is worth two in the evening
sing before breakfast, cry before night
breast  hope springs eternal in the 
human breast
music hath charms to soothe the savage 
breast
breed  birth is much but  breeding more
drought never bred dearth in England
familiarity breeds contempt
like breeds like
success breeds success
what’s bred in the bone will come out in 
the fl esh
brevis  ars longa, vita brevis See art is long 
and life is short
brevity  brevity is the soul of wit
brew  as you bake, so shall you brew
as you brew, so shall you drink
bribe  a bribe will enter without knocking
brick  you can’t make bricks without 
straw
bride  always a bridesmaid, never a 
bride
happy is the bride that the sun shines on
bridesmaid  always a bridesmaid, never 
a bride
bridge  don’t burn your bridges behind 
you
don’t cross the bridge till you come to it
it’s good to make a bridge of gold to a 
fl ying enemy
praise the bridge that carries you over
Index by Key Word
332
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd332   332 1/29/07   5:24:02 PM
bridle  a man without a religion is a 
horse without a bridle
bright  always look on the bright side
the sun is not less bright for shining on a 
dunghill See the sun loses nothing by 
shining into a puddle
the used key is always bright
brighten  blessings brighten as they take 
their fl ight
bring  borrowing brings sorrowing 
See he that goes a-borrowing, goes a-
 sorrowing
he comes too early who brings bad news
night brings counsel
nothing can bring you peace but yourself
one wedding brings another
the worth of a thing is what it will bring
broaden  travel broadens the mind
broke, broken  See break
broom  a new broom sweeps clean
broth  every cook praises his own broth
too many cooks spoil the broth
brother  all arts are brothers, each is a 
light to the other
sleep is the brother of death
build  fools build houses and wise men 
live in them
it’s easier to tear down than to build up
a jackass can kick a barn door down, but it 
takes a carpenter to build one
men build houses, women build homes See 
men make houses, women make homes
Rome was not built in a day
where God builds a church, the devil will 
build a chapel
you can’t build a church with stumbling 
blocks
you can’t keep the birds from fl ying over 
your head, but you can keep them from 
building a nest in your hair
bullet  every bullet has its billet
bully  a bully is always a coward
bump  education doesn’t come by 
bumping your head against the school 
house
if frogs had wings, they wouldn’t bump 
their tails on rocks See if a pig had 
wings, it might fl y
bundle  a man wrapped up in himself 
makes a very small bundle
bung  save at the spigot and waste at the 
bung See spare at the spigot, and let out 
the bunghole
bunghole  spare at the spigot, and let 
out the bunghole
burden  God makes the back to the 
burden
burn  better a little fi re to warm us than 
a big one to burn us
burn not your house to scare away the 
mice
a burnt child dreads the fi re
don’t burn your bridges behind you
if you play with fi re, you get burned
money burns a hole in the pocket
Nero fi ddled while Rome burned
once burned, twice shy
bury  let the dead bury the dead
bush  a bird in the hand is worth two 
in the bush
good wine needs no bush
bushel  don’t hide your light under a 
bushel
you have to eat a bushel of dirt before 
you die See we must eat a peck of dirt 
before we die
business  business before pleasure
business is business
business is like a car, it will not run by 
itself except downhill
business neglected is business lost
the business of America is business
everybody’s business is nobody’s business
mind your own business
never mix business with pleasure
Index by Key Word
333
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd333   333 1/29/07   5:24:03 PM
one business begets another
punctuality is the soul of business
busy  the busiest men have the most 
leisure
busy folks are always meddling
if you want something done, ask a busy 
person
butter  bread always falls buttered side 
down
fi ne words butter no parsnips
there are more ways of killing a dog than 
choking it with butter See there are 
more ways of killing a cat than choking 
it with cream
buy  buy in the cheapest market and sell 
in the dearest
far-fetched and dear-bought is good for 
ladies
fools build houses and wise men buy them 
See fools build houses and wise men 
live in them
gold may be bought too dear
money can’t buy happiness
talk is cheap, but it takes money to buy 
land See talk is cheap
talk is cheap, but it takes money to buy 
liquor See talk is cheap
why buy a cow when milk is so cheap? 
See 
 why buy the cow when you can get the 
milk for free?
you buy land, you buy stones; you buy 
meat, you buy bones
buyer  the buyer needs a thousand eyes, 
the seller wants but one
let the buyer beware
bygone  let bygones be bygones
ça  plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose 
See the more things change, the more 
they stay the same
cabbage  fair words butter no cabbage 
See fi ne words butter no parsnips
cackle  he that would have eggs must 
endure the cackling of hens
Caesar  Caesar’s wife must be above 
suspicion
render unto Caesar that which is Caesar’s
cage  a believer is a songless bird in a 
cage
cake  you can’t have your cake and eat 
it too
calamity  calamity is the touchstone of 
a brave mind
calendar  death keeps no calendar
calf  a bellowing cow soon forgets her 
calf
call  call a man a thief and he will steal 
call a spade a spade
call no man happy till he dies
he who pays the piper calls the tune
the hole calls the thief
many are called, but few are chosen
the pot calls the kettle black
yesterday will not be called again
calm  after a storm comes a calm
in a calm sea every man is a pilot
camel  it’s the last straw that breaks the 
camel’s back
can  can’t live with ’em, can’t live with-
out ’em
little birds that can sing and won’t sing 
must be made to sing
those who can, do; those who can’t, 
teach
you can run, but you can’t hide
candle  the game is not worth the candle
it’s better to light one candle than curse 
the darkness
candlelight  never choose your women 
or linen by candlelight
canoe  paddle your own canoe
cap  if the cap fi ts, wear it See if the shoe 
fi ts, wear it
capacity  genius is an infi nite capacity 
for taking pains
car  business is like a car, it will not run 
by itself except downhill
Index by Key Word
334
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd334   334 1/29/07   5:24:03 PM
caravan  the dogs bark, but the caravan 
goes on
carcass  where the carcass is, there will 
the eagles be gathered
card  cards are the devil’s tools
lucky at cards, unlucky in love
trust everybody, but cut the cards
care  care is no cure
care killed the cat
children are certain cares, but uncertain 
comforts
the devil takes care of his own See the 
devil looks after his own
a mother can take care of ten children, 
but sometimes ten children can’t take 
care of one mother
much coin, much care
past cure, past care
take care of number one
take care of the pennies and the dollars 
will take care of themselves
careful  be careful what you wish for: 
you might get it See don’t wish too 
hard; you might just get what you 
wished for
if you can’t be good, be careful
carpe  carpe diem See seize the day
carpenter  a jackass can kick a barn 
door down, but it takes a carpenter to 
build one
carry  a book is like a garden carried in 
the pocket
a dog that will fetch a bone will carry a 
bone
don’t carry all your eggs in one basket See 
don’t put all your eggs in one basket
praise the bridge that carries you over
speak softly and carry a big stick
the willing horse carries the load
cart  don’t put the cart before the 
horse
case  circumstances alter cases
hard cases make bad law
cast  coming events cast their shadows 
before
don’t cast your pearls before swine
let him who is without sin cast the fi rst 
stone
ne’er cast a clout till May be out
old sins cast long shadows
castle  a man’s home is his castle
casualty  truth is the fi rst casualty of war
cat  all cats are gray in the dark
anger improves nothing but the arch of a 
cat’s back
care killed the cat
a cat can look at a king
a cat has nine lives
a cat in gloves catches no mice
the cat would eat fi sh, but would not wet 
her feet
curiosity killed the cat
keep no more cats than will catch mice
there are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream
there’s more than one way to skin a cat
wanton kittens make sober cats
when the cat’s away, the mice will play
catch  all fi sh are not caught with fl ies
catching’s before hanging
catch not at shadows and lose the sub-
stance
a cat in gloves catches no mice
a drowning man will catch at a straw
eagles don’t catch fl ies
the early bird catches the worm
fi rst catch your hare
the hook without bait catches no fi sh
if the sky falls, we shall catch larks
if you run after two hares, you will catch 
neither
keep no more cats than will catch mice
a man in debt is caught in a net
the mouse that has but one hole is soon 
caught See the mouse that has but one 
hole is quickly taken
Index by Key Word
335
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd335   335 1/29/07   5:24:03 PM
patience is a virtue, catch it if you can: 
seldom in a woman and never in a man 
See patience is a virtue
set a thief to catch a thief
a shut mouth catches no fl ies
softly, softly, catchee monkey
sue a beggar and catch a louse
throw out a sprat to catch a mackerel
you can catch more fl ies with honey than 
with vinegar
you can’t catch old birds with chaff
cattle  hurry no man’s cattle
caught  See catch
cause  a man is a lion in his own cause
men are blind in their own cause
nobody should be judge in his own cause
caution  caution is the parent of safety
caveat  caveat emptor See let the buyer 
beware
cease  war will cease when men refuse 
to fi ght
wonders will never cease!
celare  ars est celare artem See the best art 
conceals art
certain  children are certain cares, but 
uncertain comforts
nothing is certain but death and taxes
nothing is certain but the unforeseen
chacun  chacun à son goût See every man 
to his taste
chaff  you can’t catch old birds with 
chaff
chain  a chain is no stronger than its 
weakest link
chance  blind chance sweeps the world 
along
you pays your money and you takes your 
chance See you pays your money and 
you takes your choice
change  a change is as good as a rest
change not a clout till May be out See 
ne’er cast a clout till May be out
don’t change horses in the middle of 
the stream See don’t swap horses in 
midstream
don’t change the rules in the middle of 
the game
honors change manners
the leopard can’t change its spots
the more things change, the more they 
stay the same
times change, and we with time
what you put off and what you put on, 
never change till May be gone See ne’er 
cast a clout till May be out
a wise man changes his mind, but a fool 
never does
change  plus ça change, plus c’est la même 
chose See the more things change, the 
more they stay the same
channel  great minds run in the same 
channels See great minds think alike
chapel  where God builds a church, the 
devil will build a chapel
character  character is destiny
dreams retain the infi rmities of our char-
acter
charity  charity begins at home
charity covers a multitude of sins
charity is not a bone you throw to a dog 
but a bone you share with a dog
charm  music hath charms to soothe the 
savage breast
the third time is the charm
if and an spoils many a good charter
chase  he who chases two hares catches 
neither See if you run after two hares, 
you will catch neither
a stern chase is a long chase
che  che sarà, sarà See what will be, will 
be
cheap  buy in the cheapest market and 
sell in the dearest
it’s as cheap sitting as standing
talk is cheap
Index by Key Word
336
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd336   336 1/29/07   5:24:03 PM
why buy a cow when milk is so cheap? See 
why buy a cow when you can get the 
milk for free?
cheat  cheaters never win and winners 
never cheat See cheaters never prosper
cheats never prosper See cheaters never 
prosper
cheater  cheaters never prosper
cheep  may chickens come cheeping
cheer  welcome is the best cheer
cheerful  cheerful company shortens 
the miles See good company on the 
road is the shortest cut
a merry heart makes a cheerful counte-
nance
cheese  cheese digests all things but 
itself
cherry  life is just a bowl of cherries
chew  don’t bite off more than you can 
chew
chicken  curses, like chickens, come 
home to roost
don’t count your chickens before they 
are hatched
may chickens come cheeping
which came fi rst, the chicken or the egg?
chief  too many chiefs and not enough 
Indians
child  as the twig is bent, the child will 
grow See as the twig is bent, so is the 
tree inclined
a burnt child dreads the fi re
the child is father of the man
a child on a giant’s shoulders sees further 
of the two See a dwarf on a giant’s 
shoulders sees further of the two
children and fools speak the truth
children are certain cares, but uncertain 
comforts
children should be seen and not heard
the child that is born on the Sabbath day is 
bonny and blithe and good and gay
the devil’s children have the devil’s luck
fools and children should never see half-
done work
Friday’s child is loving and giving
give me a child for the fi rst seven years 
and he is mine for life
happy is he that is happy in his children
heaven protects children, sailors, and 
drunken men
he that has a wife and children has given 
hostages to fortune
it’s a wise child that knows its own father
it takes a village to raise a child
late children, early orphans
Monday’s child is fair of face
a mother can take care of ten children, 
but sometimes ten children can’t take 
care of one mother
never work with children or animals
praise the child, and you make love to 
the mother
prejudice is the child of ignorance
Saturday’s child works hard for its living
the shoemaker’s child always goes bare-
foot
spare the rod and spoil the child
Thursday’s child has far to go
Tuesday’s child is full of grace
Wednesday’s child is full of woe
chip  let the chips fall where they may
choice  he that has a choice has trouble
the obvious choice is usually a quick 
regret
small choice in rotten apples
you pays your money and you takes your 
choice
choke  it’s idle to swallow the cow and 
choke on the tail
there are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream
choose  choose the lesser of two evils
many are called, but few are chosen
never choose your women or linen by 
candlelight
Index by Key Word
337
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd337   337 1/29/07   5:24:03 PM
chooser  beggars can’t be choosers
chose  plus ça change, plus c’est la même 
chose See the more things change, the 
more they stay the same
Christmas  Christmas comes but once 
a year
the devil makes his Christmas pies of law-
yers’ tongues and clerks’ fi ngers
church  the blood of the martyrs is the 
seed of the church
the church is an anvil which has worn out 
many hammers
a church is God between four walls
the nearer the church, the farther from 
God
where God builds a church, the devil will 
build a chapel
you can’t build a church with stumbling 
blocks
churchyard  a green winter makes a fat 
churchyard
a young physician fattens the churchyard 
See a young barber, an old physician
cinch  life is hard by the yard, but by the 
inch life’s a cinch
circle  the wheel comes full circle
circumstance  circumstances alter cases
cite  the devil can cite scripture for his 
purpose
cito  bis dat qui cito dat See he gives twice 
who gives quickly
city  a great city, a great solitude
if every man would sweep his own door-
step the city would soon be clean
you can’t fi ght City Hall
civil  a civil question deserves a civil 
answer
civility  civility costs nothing
there’s nothing lost by civility
clad  an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, 
though they be clad in silk or scarlet
claw  a goose quill is more dangerous 
than a lion’s claw
clean  don’t throw away your dirty 
water until you get clean
if every man would sweep his own door-
step the city would soon be clean
a new broom sweeps clean
sweep your own doorstep clean
cleanliness  cleanliness is next to God-
liness
clear  a clear conscience can bear any 
trouble
rain before seven, clear before eleven See 
rain before seven, fi ne before eleven
clergyman  clergymen’s sons always 
turn out badly
clerk  the clock goes as it pleases the 
clerk
the devil makes his Christmas pies of law-
yers’ tongues and clerks’ fi ngers
client  a man who is his own lawyer has 
a fool for his client
climb  he that would eat the fruit must 
climb the tree
he who would climb the ladder must 
begin at the bottom
the higher the monkey climbs the more he 
shows his tail
climber  hasty climbers have sudden 
falls
clock  the clock goes as it pleases the 
clerk
clog  from clogs to clogs is only three 
generations See from shirtsleeves to 
shirtsleeves is only three generations
close (adj.)  the closer to the bone, the 
sweeter the meat See the nearer the 
bone, the sweeter the fl esh
close sits my shirt, but closer my skin 
See near is my shirt, but nearer is my 
skin
little boats should stay close to shore
close (v.)  a closed mouth catches no 
fl ies See a shut mouth catches no fl ies
love is blind; friendship closes its eyes
Index by Key Word
338
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd338   338 1/29/07   5:24:04 PM
when one door closes, another one 
opens
closet  there’s a skeleton in every 
closet
cloth  cut your coat according to your 
cloth
clothes  clothes don’t make the man
clothes make the man
there’s no such thing as bad weather, only 
the wrong clothes
cloud  every cloud has a silver lining
if there were no clouds, we shouldn’t 
enjoy the sun
clout  ne’er cast a clout till May be out
clutch  a drowning man will clutch at 
a straw See a drowning man will catch 
at a straw
coat  cut your coat according to your 
cloth
cobbler  the cobbler’s children go bare-
foot See the shoemaker’s child always 
goes barefoot
let the cobbler stick to his last
cock  every cock will crow upon his 
own dunghill
it’s a sad house where the hen crows 
louder than the cock
the robin and the wren are God’s cock 
and hen
there’s many a good cock come out of a 
tattered bag
the young cock crows as he heard the 
old one
coin  much coin, much care
cold  as the day lengthens, so the cold 
strengthens
cold hands, warm heart
conscience gets a lot of credit that belongs 
to cold feet
feed a cold and starve a fever
not love is soon cold
pride feels no cold See pride feels no pain
revenge is a dish best eaten cold
color  a good horse cannot be of a bad 
color
comb  experience is a comb that fate 
gives a man when his hair is all gone
come  all good things must come to 
an end
all things come to an end See everything 
has an end
all things come to those who wait
a bad penny always comes back See a bad 
penny always turns up
between two stools we come to the 
ground See between two stools one 
falls to the ground
the bigger they come, the harder they 
fall See the bigger they are, the harder 
they fall
Christmas comes but once a year
come live with me and you’ll know me
coming events cast their shadows before
cream always comes to the top
don’t cross the bridge till you come to it
easy come, easy go
fi rst come, fi rst served
if the mountain will not come to Moham-
med, Mohammed must go to the 
mountain
ill news comes apace See bad news travels 
fast
it’ll all come out in the wash
March comes in like a lion, and goes out 
like a lamb
misfortunes never come singly
nothing comes of nothing
nothing goes over the back but that comes 
under the belly See what’s got over the 
devil’s back is spent under his belly
pride comes before a fall See pride goes 
before a fall
quickly come, quickly go
sorrow comes unsent for
take things as they come
Index by Key Word
339
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd339   339 1/29/07   5:24:04 PM
there are as good fi sh in the sea as ever 
came out of it See there are other fi sh 
in the sea
things come in threes
tomorrow never comes
what goes around, comes around
what goes up must come down
what’s bred in the bone will come out in 
the fl esh
the wheel comes full circle
when poverty comes in at the door, love 
fl ies out of the window
when the worst comes, the worst is going 
See when things are at the worst they 
begin to mend
which came fi rst, the chicken or the egg?
with age comes wisdom
the worst is yet to come
you can drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back
comfort  children are certain cares, but 
uncertain comforts
command  he that cannot obey cannot 
command
commend  all commend patience, but 
none can endure to suffer
commission  there’s a sin of omission as 
well as of commission
common  ask advice, but use your own 
common sense
a common danger causes common action
common fame is seldom to blame
an ounce of common sense is worth a 
pound of theory
communication  evil communications 
corrupt good manners
company  the company makes the 
feast
desert and reward seldom keep com-
pany
good company on the road is the short-
est cut
a man is known by the company he keeps
misery loves company
money loves company See money begets 
money
two’s company, three’s a crowd
comparison  comparisons are odious
comply  he that complies against his will 
is of his own opinion still
conceal  the best art conceals art
crime must be concealed by crime
drunkenness reveals what soberness con-
ceals
condemn  those who cannot remember 
the past are condemned to repeat it
confess  confess and be hanged
a fault confessed is half redressed
confession  confession is good for the 
soul
confessor  it’s a foolish sheep that makes 
the wolf his confessor
conquer  divide and conquer
love conquers all
conscience  a clear conscience can bear 
any trouble
conscience does make cowards of us all
conscience gets a lot of credit that belongs 
to cold feet
a guilty conscience needs no accuser
consent  silence gives consent
consist  art consists in concealing art 
See the best art conceals art
consistency  a foolish consistency is the 
hobgoblin of little minds
constant  constant dropping wears 
away a stone
a constant guest is never welcome
there’s nothing constant but inconstancy
contagious  courtesy is contagious
contempt  familiarity breeds contempt
content  a contented mind is a con-
tinual feast
content is more than a kingdom
continual  a contented mind is a con-
tinual feast
Index by Key Word
340
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd340   340 1/29/07   5:24:04 PM
contrary  dreams go by contraries
cook  every cook praises his own broth
God sends meat, but the devil sends 
cooks
too many cooks spoil the broth
coolness  the only thing a heated argu-
ment ever produced is coolness
core  believing has a core of unbeliev-
ing
corner  a new broom sweeps clean, but 
an old broom knows all the corners See 
a new broom sweeps clean
prosperity is just around the corner
coronet  kind hearts are more than 
coronets
corporation  corporations have neither 
bodies to be punished nor souls to be 
damned
corpse  happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on, blessed is the corpse that the 
rain falls on See happy is the bride that 
the sun shines on
corrupt  evil communications corrupt 
good manners
power corrupts, and absolute power cor-
rupts absolutely
corruption  corruption will fi nd a dozen 
alibis for its evil deeds
cost  civility costs nothing
costly  agree, for the law is costly
cough  a dry cough is the trumpeter 
of death
love and a cough cannot be hid
council  councils of war never fi ght
counsel  a fool may give a wise man 
counsel
night brings counsel
count  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; 
creep under the thorn, it can save you 
from harm
don’t count your chickens before they 
are hatched
countenance  a merry heart makes a 
cheerful countenance
country  God made the country and 
man made the town
happy is the country that has no history
in the country of the blind, the one-eyed 
man is king
a prophet is not without honor, save in his 
own country
so many countries, so many customs
you can take the boy out of the country 
but you can’t take the country out of 
the boy
couple  a deaf husband and a blind wife 
are always a happy couple
two’s a couple, three’s a crowd, four’s too 
many, and fi ve’s not allowed See two’s 
company, three’s a crowd
courage  courage is fear that has said 
its prayers
courageous  one courageous thought 
will put to fl ight a host of troubles
course  the course of true love never 
did run smooth
horses for courses
nature will have its course
youth will have its course See youth will 
have its fl ing
courtesy  courtesy costs nothing See 
civility costs nothing
courtesy is contagious
cover  charity covers a multitude of 
sins
don’t judge a book by its cover
an honest look covereth many faults
coverlet  everybody stretches his legs 
according to the length of his coverlet
cow  a bellowing cow soon forgets her 
calf
better a good cow than a cow of a good 
kind
the cow knows not the value of her tail till 
she has lost it
Index by Key Word
341
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd341   341 1/29/07   5:24:04 PM
it’s idle to swallow the cow and choke 
on the tail
three things are not to be trusted: a cow’s 
horn, a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s hoof
why buy a cow when milk is so cheap? See 
why buy the cow when you can get the 
milk for free?
coward  a bully is always a coward
conscience does make cowards of us all
cowards die many times before their 
death
cowl  the cowl does not make the 
monk
crack  he that would eat the kernel 
must crack the nut See he that would 
eat the fruit must climb the tree
step on a crack, break your mother’s 
back
cradle  the hand that rocks the cradle 
rules the world
crave  spare and have is better than 
spend and crave
crawl  you have to learn to crawl before 
you can walk See we must learn to walk 
before we can run
creak  a creaking door hangs longest
cream  cream always comes to the top
there are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream
create  all men are created equal
credit  conscience gets a lot of credit 
that belongs to cold feet
give credit where credit is due
creep  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the 
fl ash; creep under the thorn, it can save 
you from harm
when the wolf comes in at the door, love 
creeps out of the window See when 
poverty comes in at the door, love fl ies 
out of the window
crime  crime doesn’t pay
crime must be concealed by crime
poverty is not a crime
criticism  the best place for criticism is 
in front of your mirror
criticism is something you can avoid by 
saying nothing, doing nothing, and 
being nothing
crop  good seed makes a good crop
cross  crosses are ladders that lead to 
heaven
cross the stream where it is shallowest
don’t cross the bridge till you come to it
we all have our cross to bear
crow  a crow doesn’t pick out the eye of 
another crow See hawks will not pick 
out hawks’ eyes
every cock will crow upon his own dung-
hill
it’s a sad house where the hen crows 
louder than the cock
one for the mouse, one for the crow, one 
to rot, one to grow
a whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men
the young cock crows as he heard the 
old one
crowd  two’s company, three’s a crowd
crown  the end crowns the work
uneasy lies the head that wears a crown
cry  don’t cry before you’re hurt
it’s better to laugh than to cry
it’s no use crying over spilled milk
much cry and little wool
sing before breakfast, cry before night
cup  full cup, steady hand
the last drop makes the cup run over
the optimist’s cup is half full; the pessi-
mist’s cup is half empty See the glass is 
either half empty or half full
there’s many a slip between cup and lip
curantur  similia similibus curantur See 
like cures like
cure  care is no cure
Index by Key Word
342
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd342   342 1/29/07   5:24:04 PM
the cure may be worse than the disease 
See the remedy may be worse than the 
disease
diet cures more than doctors
like cures like
an ounce of prevention is worth a pound 
of cure
past cure, past care
prevention is better than cure
what can’t be cured must be endured
curiosity  curiosity killed the cat
curry  a short horse is soon curried
curse  curses, like chickens, come home 
to roost
it’s better to light one candle than curse 
the darkness
custom  other times, other customs See 
other times, other manners
so many countries, so many customs
customer  the customer is always right
cut  cut your coat according to your 
cloth
diamond cuts diamond
don’t cut off your nose to spite your face
fi sh or cut bait
good company on the road is the short-
est cut
many kiss the hand they wish to see cut 
off
a slice off a cut loaf isn’t missed
the tongue is not steel, but it cuts
trust everybody, but cut the cards
daisy  it’s not spring until you can plant 
your foot upon twelve daisies
damn  corporations have neither bod-
ies to be punished nor souls to be 
damned
there are lies, damned lies, and statistics
you’ll be damned if you do and damned 
if you don’t
dance  the devil dances in an empty 
pocket
he that lives in hope dances to an ill tune
they that dance must pay the piper
when you go to dance, take heed whom 
you take by the hand
you need more than dancing shoes to be 
a dancer
dancer  you need more than dancing 
shoes to be a dancer
danger  a common danger causes com-
mon action
the danger past and God forgotten nought 
is never in danger
out of debt, out of danger
the post of honor is the post of danger
dangerous  delays are dangerous
a goose quill is more dangerous than a 
lion’s claw
a little knowledge is a dangerous thing
dark  all cats are gray in the dark
the darkest cloud has a silver lining See 
every cloud has a silver lining
the darkest hour is just before dawn
look on the bright side, or polish up the 
dark one See always look on the bright 
side
darkness  it’s better to light one candle 
than curse the darkness
darling  better be an old man’s darling 
than a young man’s slave
dat  bis dat qui cito dat See he gives twice 
who gives quickly
daughter  admiration is the daughter of 
ignorance
he that would the daughter win, must 
with the mother fi rst begin
like mother, like daughter
a son is a son till he gets him a wife, a 
daughter’s a daughter all of her life
dawn  the darkest hour is just before 
dawn
day  another day, another dollar
an apple a day keeps the doctor away
as the day lengthens, so the cold 
strengthens
Index by Key Word
343
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd343   343 1/29/07   5:24:04 PM
be the day weary or be the day long, at last 
it ringeth to evensong
the better the day, the better the deed
the child that is born on the Sabbath day is 
bonny and blithe and good and gay
the day is short and the work is long
every dog has his day
fair and softly goes far in a day
fi sh and guests stink after three days
from the day you were born till you ride 
in a hearse, there’s nothing so bad but 
it might have been worse See nothing so 
bad but it might have been worse
give a man a fi sh, and you feed him for 
a day; show him how to fi sh, and you 
feed him for a lifetime
he who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day
an hour before breakfast is worth two the 
rest of the day See an hour in the morn-
ing is worth two in the evening
it’s all in a day’s work
live every day as though it were your last
the longest day must have an end
my son is my son till he gets him a wife, 
but my daughter’s my daughter all the 
days of her life See a son is a son till he 
gets him a wife, a daughter’s a daughter 
all of her life
never is a long day See never is a long 
time
one of these days is none of these days
Rome was not built in a day
save something for a rainy day
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, 
bad luck you’ll have all the day
seize the day
suffi cient unto the day is the evil thereof
tomorrow is another day
a wonder lasts but nine days
dead  be happy while you’re living, for 
you’re a long time dead
better be dead than out of fashion See 
better be out of the world than out of 
the fashion
blessed are the dead that the rain rains on
call no man happy till he is dead See call no 
man happy till he dies
dead men don’t bite
dead men tell no tales
it’s ill waiting for dead men’s shoes
let the dead bury the dead
a live dog is better than a dead lion
never speak ill of the dead
praise no man till he is dead
stone-dead hath no fellow
three may keep a secret, if two of them 
are dead
deadly  the female of the species is 
deadlier than the male
deaf  a deaf husband and a blind wife are 
always a happy couple
there are none so deaf as those who will 
not hear
dear  buy in the cheapest market and 
sell in the dearest
experience keeps a dear school
far-fetched and dear-bought is good for 
ladies
gold may be bought too dear
a thing you don’t want is dear at any 
price
dearth  drought never bred dearth in 
England
death  after death the doctor
better death than dishonor
cowards die many times before their death
death defi es the doctor
death is the great leveler
death keeps no calendar
death pays all debts
a dry cough is the trumpeter of death
every door may be shut but death’s door
give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it to 
death
Index by Key Word
344
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd344   344 1/29/07   5:24:05 PM
medicine can prolong life, but death will 
seize the doctor, too
nothing is certain but death and taxes
sleep is the brother of death
there’s a remedy for everything except 
death
debt  death pays all debts
a man in debt is caught in a net
out of debt, out of danger
speak not of my debts unless you mean 
to pay them
deceit  self-deceit is the easiest of any
deceive  appearances are deceiving
what a tangled web we weave when fi rst 
we practice to deceive
deceptive  appearances are deceptive 
See appearances are deceiving
deed  the better the day, the better the 
deed
corruption will fi nd a dozen alibis for its 
evil deeds
deeds, not words
deeds are fruits, words are but leaves
no good deed goes unpunished
take the will for the deed
deep  beauty is only skin deep
don’t get into deep water until you learn 
how to swim See don’t go near the 
water until you learn how to swim
no tree takes so deep a root as prejudice
still waters run deep
defeat  victory has a hundred fathers and 
defeat is an orphan See success has many 
fathers, while failure is an orphan
defense  the best defense is a good 
offense
defer  hope deferred makes the heart 
sick
defi le  he that touches pitch shall be 
defi led
defy  death defi es the doctor
dei  vox populi, vox Dei See the voice of the 
people is the voice of God
delay  delays are dangerous
desires are nourished by delays
delight  red sky at night, sailor’s delight; 
red sky in the morning, sailors take 
warning
delve  when Adam delved and Eve span, 
who was then the gentleman?
Denmark  something is rotten in the 
state of Denmark
deny  deny self for self’s sake
desert (n.)  desert and reward seldom 
keep company
desert (v.)  rats desert a sinking ship
deserve  a civil question deserves a civil 
answer
none but the brave deserve the fair
one good turn deserves another
desire  desires are nourished by delays
good health is more to be desired than 
wealth See health is wealth
humble hearts have humble desires
if you desire peace, prepare for war See if 
you want peace, prepare for war
desperate  desperate diseases must have 
desperate remedies
destiny  character is destiny
hanging and wiving go by destiny
destroy  whom the gods would destroy, 
they fi rst make mad
detail  the devil is in the details
devil  away goes the devil when he fi nds 
the door shut against him
better the devil you know than the devil 
you don’t know
cards are the devil’s tools
the devil always leaves a stink behind him
the devil can cite scripture for his pur-
pose
the devil dances in an empty pocket
the devil fi nds work for idle hands to do
the devil gets up to the belfry by the 
vicar’s skirts
the devil is in the details
Index by Key Word
345
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd345   345 1/29/07   5:24:05 PM
the devil is not as black as he is painted
the devil looks after his own
the devil lurks behind the cross See the 
devil gets up to the belfry by the vicar’s 
skirts
the devil makes his Christmas pies of law-
yers’ tongues and clerks’ fi ngers
the devil’s children have the devil’s luck
the devil was sick, the devil a saint would 
be; the devil was well, the devil a saint 
was he
every man for himself and the devil take 
the hindmost
give a thing, and take a thing, to wear the 
devil’s gold ring
give the devil his due
God sends meat, but the devil sends cooks
haste is from the devil
he who sups with the devil should have a 
long spoon
an idle brain is the devil’s workshop
needs must when the devil drives
parsley seed goes nine times to the devil
set a beggar on horseback, and he’ll ride 
to the devil
speak of the devil and he always appears
tell the truth and shame the devil
what’s got over the devil’s back is spent 
under his belly
where God builds a church, the devil will 
build a chapel
why should the devil have all the best 
tunes?
young saint, old devil
diamond  diamond cuts diamond
dictionary  the only place where success 
comes before work is in a dictionary
die  call no man happy till he dies
cowards die many times before their 
death
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow 
we die
envy never dies
good Americans, when they die, go to 
Paris
the good die young
he that lives on hope will die fasting
he who lives by the sword dies by the 
sword
it’s better to die on your feet than live on 
your knees
life’s a bitch, and then you die
live and learn; die and forget See live and 
learn
a man can only die once
more die of food than famine
never say die
old habits die hard
old soldiers never die
one for wind and one for crow, one to 
die and one to grow See one for the 
mouse, one for the crow, one to rot, 
one to grow
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lie, 
you’ll want a pin before you die See see 
a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, 
bad luck you’ll have all the day
we must eat a peck of dirt before we die
whom the gods love die young
you can only die once
you can’t shift an old tree without it 
dying
young men may die, but old men must 
die
diem  carpe diem See seize the day
diet  the best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. 
Quiet, and Dr. Merryman
diet cures more than doctors
he that lives on hope has a slender diet See 
he that lives on hope will die fasting
differ  tastes differ
difference  the only difference between 
stumbling blocks and stepping-stones 
is the way you use them
Index by Key Word
346
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd346   346 1/29/07   5:24:05 PM
different  different strokes for differ-
ent folks
diffi cult  all things are easy to industry, 
all things diffi cult to sloth
the diffi cult is done at once, the impos-
sible takes a little longer
it’s the fi rst step that is diffi cult See the 
fi rst step is the hardest
dig  dig the well before you are thirsty
when you are in a hole, stop digging
digest  cheese digests all things but 
itself
diligence  diligence is the mother of 
good luck
dinner  after dinner rest awhile, after 
supper walk a mile
better a dinner of herbs where love is than 
a stalled ox where hate is
dirt  poverty comes from God, but not 
dirt
throw dirt enough, and some will stick
we must eat a peck of dirt before we die
dirty  dirty water will quench fi re
don’t throw away your dirty water until 
you get clean
don’t wash your dirty linen in public
disappoint  blessed are they who expect 
nothing, for they shall not be disap-
pointed
discover  prosperity discovers vice; 
adversity, virtue
discretion  discretion is the better part 
of valor
an ounce of discretion is worth a pound 
of wit
disease  desperate diseases must have 
desperate remedies
the doctor is often more to be feared than 
the disease
the remedy may be worse than the dis-
ease
disgrace  poverty is no disgrace, but it’s 
a great inconvenience
dish  revenge is a dish best eaten cold
welcome is the best dish on the table See 
welcome is the best cheer
wishes won’t wash dishes
dishonor  better death than dishonor
disillusion  absence is the mother of 
disillusion
dismount  he who rides a tiger is afraid 
to dismount
dispose  man proposes, God disposes
disputandum  de gustibus non est dispu-
tandum See there’s no disputing about 
tastes
dispute  there’s no disputing about tastes
distance  distance lends enchantment 
to the view
ditch  if one sheep leaps over the ditch, 
all the rest will follow
if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch
divide  divide and conquer
a house divided against itself cannot 
stand
united we stand, divided we fall
dividend  honesty is the best policy, 
though it may not pay the largest divi-
dends See honesty is the best policy
divine  to err is human, to forgive 
divine
do  criticism is something you can avoid 
by saying nothing, doing nothing, and 
being nothing
do as I say, not as I do
do as you would be done by
do right and fear no man
do unto others as you would have them 
do unto you
do well and have well See never do things 
by halves
easier said than done
easy does it
everybody talks about the weather, but 
nobody does anything about it
Index by Key Word
347
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd347   347 1/29/07   5:24:05 PM
fools and children should never see half-
done work
the good that men do lives after them
handsome is as handsome does
happy’s the wooing that’s not long a-
doing
if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth doing 
well
if you want a thing done well, do it 
yourself
it’s dogged as does it
the king can do no wrong
a man’s got to do what a man’s got to do
monkey see, monkey do
the more said, the less done
nature does nothing in vain
never do evil that good may come of it
never do things by halves
never put off until tomorrow what you 
can do today
never send a boy to do a man’s job
the sooner begun, the sooner done
tell not all you know, nor do all you can
those who can, do; those who can’t, 
teach
well begun is half done
whatever man has done, man may do
what’s done cannot be undone
when in doubt, do nothing
when in Rome, do as the Romans do
a woman’s work is never done
you’ll be damned if you do and damned 
if you don’t
you never know what you can do until 
you try
doctor  after death the doctor
an apple a day keeps the doctor away
the best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, 
and Dr. Merryman
death defi es the doctor
diet cures more than doctors
the doctor is often more to be feared than 
the disease
medicine can prolong life, but death will 
seize the doctor, too
doer  evil doers are evil dreaders
dog  a barking dog never bites
better be the head of a dog than the tail 
of a lion
charity is not a bone you throw to a dog 
but a bone you share with a dog
a dead dog tells no tales See dead men tell 
no tales
the dog always returns to his vomit
dog does not eat dog
a dog is a man’s best friend
the dogs bark, but the caravan goes on
a dog that will fetch a bone will carry a 
bone
every dog has his day
every dog is a lion at home See every cock 
will crow upon his own dunghill
every dog is allowed one bite
give a dog a bad name and hang him
a good dog deserves a good bone
he that would hang his dog gives out fi rst 
that he is mad
if you can’t run with the big dogs, stay 
under the porch
if you lie down with dogs, you’ll get up 
with fl eas
if you want something done, ask a busy 
person
it’s a poor dog that’s not worth whistling 
for
it’s easy to fi nd a stick to beat a dog
it’s not the size of the dog in the fi ght, it’s 
the size of the fi ght in the dog
let sleeping dogs lie
a live dog is better than a dead lion
love me, love my dog
take a hair of the dog that bit you
there are more ways of killing a dog than 
choking it with butter See there are 
more ways of killing a cat than choking 
it with cream
Index by Key Word
348
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd348   348 1/29/07   5:24:05 PM
there are more ways of killing a dog than 
hanging it See there are more ways 
of killing a cat than choking it with 
cream
three things are not to be trusted: a cow’s 
horn, a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s hoof
when a dog bites a man, that is not news; 
but when a man bites a dog, that is 
news
while two dogs are fi ghting for a bone, a 
third runs away with it
why keep a dog and bark yourself?
you can’t teach an old dog new tricks
dogged  it’s dogged as does it
dollar  another day, another dollar
take care of the pennies and the dollars 
will take care of themselves
done  See do
door  away goes the devil when he fi nds 
the door shut against him
a creaking door hangs longest
don’t shut the barn door after the horse 
is stolen
a door must be either shut or open
drive nature out of the door and it will 
return by the window See you can drive 
out nature with a pitchfork but she 
keeps on coming back
every door may be shut but death’s door
a golden key can open any door
a jackass can kick a barn door down, but it 
takes a carpenter to build one
an open door may tempt a saint
opportunity never knocks twice at any 
man’s door See opportunity knocks 
but once
a postern door makes a thief
when one door closes, another one opens
when poverty comes in at the door, love 
fl ies out of the window
doorstep  if every man would sweep 
his own doorstep the city would soon 
be clean
sweep your own doorstep clean
dose  a dose of adversity is often as 
needful as a dose of medicine
doubt  when in doubt, do nothing
down  don’t hit a man when he’s down
he that is down need fear no fall
prejudice is being down on what we are 
not up on
what goes up must come down
downhill  business is like a car, it will 
not run by itself except downhill
downward  the fi sh always stinks from 
the head downward See a fi sh stinks 
from the head
dozen  corruption will fi nd a dozen ali-
bis for its evil deeds
it’s six of one and half a dozen of the 
other
draw  beauty draws with a single hair
beware of an oak, it draws the stroke; avoid 
an ash, it counts the fl ash; creep under 
the thorn, it can save you from harm
whosoever draws his sword against the 
prince must throw the scabbard away
dread  a burnt child dreads the fi re
dreader  evil doers are evil dreaders
dream  dream of a funeral and you hear 
of a marriage
dreams go by contraries
dreams retain the infi rmities of our char-
acter
morning dreams come true
drill  no names, no pack-drill
drink  as you brew, so shall you drink
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow 
we die
he that drinks beer, thinks beer
water is the only drink for a wise man
you can lead a horse to water, but you 
can’t make him drink
drip  constant dripping wears away a 
stone See constant dropping wears 
away a stone
Index by Key Word
349
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd349   349 1/29/07   5:24:05 PM
a dripping June sets all in tune
drive  bad money drives out good
drive gently over the stones
hunger drives the wolf out of the wood
needs must when the devil drives
one nail drives out another
people are more easily led than driven
you can drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back
drop  constant dropping wears away a 
stone
the last drop makes the cup run over
little drops of water, little grains of sand, 
make a mighty ocean and a pleasant 
land
drought  drought never bred dearth in 
England
drown  a drowning man will catch at 
a straw
if you’re born to be hanged, then you’ll 
never be drowned
wine has drowned more men than the 
sea
drunkard  children, fools, and drunk-
ards tell the truth See children and 
fools speak the truth
drunken  heaven protects children, sail-
ors, and drunken men
drunkenness  drunkenness reveals what 
soberness conceals
dry  a dry cough is the trumpeter of 
death
a dry May and a dripping June bringeth 
all things in tune See a dripping June 
sets all in tune
put your trust in God, and keep your 
powder dry
sow dry and set wet
you never miss the water till the well 
runs dry
duck  go hunting where the ducks are
if it looks like a duck, walks like a duck, 
and quacks like a duck, it’s a duck
due  give credit where credit is due
give the devil his due
worry is interest paid on trouble before 
it falls due
dull  all work and no play makes Jack a 
dull boy
dunghill  every cock will crow upon his 
own dunghill
the sun is not less bright for shining on a 
dunghill See the sun loses nothing by 
shining into a puddle
duty  the fi rst duty of a soldier is obedi-
ence
dwarf  a dwarf on a giant’s shoulders 
sees further of the two
each  to each his own
eagle  eagles don’t catch fl ies
where the carcass is, there will the eagles 
be gathered
ear  fi elds have eyes and woods have 
ears
a hungry stomach has no ears
keep your mouth shut and your ears open 
See keep your mouth shut and your 
eyes open
little pitchers have big ears
walls have ears
you can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s 
ear
early  the early bird catches the worm
the early man never borrows from the 
late man
early ripe, early rotten See soon ripe, soon 
rotten
early to bed and early to rise, makes a man 
healthy, wealthy, and wise
he comes too early who brings bad news
it’s better to be an hour too early than a 
minute too late
late children, early orphans
earn  a penny saved is a penny earned
earth  the meek shall inherit the earth
Index by Key Word
350
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd350   350 1/29/07   5:24:06 PM
easily  he who has a mind to beat a dog 
will easily fi nd a stick See it’s easy to 
fi nd a stick to beat a dog
an old fox is not easily snared
people are more easily led than driven
east  east, west, home’s best
East is East and West is West and never the 
twain shall meet
when the wind is in the east, ’tis neither 
good for man nor beast
easy  all things are easy to industry, all 
things diffi cult to sloth
easier said than done
easy come, easy go
easy does it
it’s easier to tear down than to build up
it’s easy to be wise after the event
it’s easy to fi nd a stick to beat a dog
the least said is the easiest mended See 
least said, soonest mended
promises are like piecrust: easy made and 
easy broken See promises, like piecrust, 
are made to be broken
self-deceit is the easiest of any
eat  appetite comes with eating
big fi sh eat little fi sh
the cat would eat fi sh, but would not wet 
her feet
dog does not eat dog
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow 
we die
eat to live, do not live to eat
he that would eat the fruit must climb 
the tree
he who does not work, neither should 
he eat
the proof of the pudding is in the eating
revenge is a dish best eaten cold
we must eat a peck of dirt before we die
whose bread I eat, his song I sing
you are what you eat
you can’t have your cake and eat it too
eavesdropper  eavesdroppers hear no 
good of themselves See listeners never 
hear any good of themselves
edge  it’s ill jesting with edged tools
education  education doesn’t come by 
bumping your head against the school 
house
genius without education is like silver in 
the mine
never let your education interfere with 
your intelligence
egg  as good be an addled egg as an 
idle bird
don’t kill the goose that lays the golden 
eggs
don’t put all your eggs in one basket
don’t teach your grandmother to suck eggs
half an egg is better than an empty shell 
See half a loaf is better than no bread
he that would have eggs must endure the 
cackling of hens
all ill bird lays an ill egg
which came fi rst, the chicken or the egg?
you can’t make an omelette without 
breaking eggs
you can’t unscramble eggs
eight  six hours’ sleep for a man, seven 
for a woman, and eight for a fool
elephant  an elephant never forgets
eleven  rain before seven, fi ne before 
eleven
ell  give a man an inch and he’ll take 
an ell See give a man an inch and he’ll 
take a mile
elm  every elm has its man
employee  every employee tends to rise 
to his level of incompetence
emptor  caveat emptor See let the buyer 
beware
empty  the devil dances in an empty 
pocket
an empty sack cannot stand upright
empty vessels make the most sound
Index by Key Word
351
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd351   351 1/29/07   5:24:06 PM
the glass is either half empty or half full
half an egg is better than an empty shell 
See half a loaf is better than no bread
enchantment  distance lends enchant-
ment to the view
end  all good things must come to an end
all’s well that ends well
a bayonet is a weapon with a worker at 
each end
charity begins at home but should not end 
there See charity begins at home
the end crowns the work
the end justifi es the means
everything has an end
a good beginning makes a good ending
he who wills the end, wills the means
an ill beginning makes an ill ending
it’s not the end of the world
it takes two to make a quarrel, but one 
can end it See it takes two to make a 
quarrel
the longest day must have an end
there’s a pot of gold at the end of the 
rainbow
time ends all things
truth is truth to the end of the reckoning
a whistling girl and a crowing hen always 
come to the same bad end See a whis-
tling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men
endure  all commend patience, but none 
can endure to suffer
he that would have eggs must endure the 
cackling of hens
what can’t be cured must be endured
enemy  action is worry’s worst enemy
the best is the enemy of the good
the enemy of my enemy is my friend
every man is his own worst enemy
God protect me from my friends—I can 
protect myself from my enemies See 
save us from our friends
the good is the enemy of the best
it’s good to make a bridge of gold to a 
fl ying enemy
lend money and you get an enemy See 
lend your money and lose your friend
love your enemy, but don’t put a gun in 
his hand
one enemy is too much
there’s no little enemy
trust not a new friend nor an old enemy
with friends like that, who needs enemies?
engage  when you argue with a fool, 
make sure he isn’t similarly engaged
England  drought never bred dearth in 
England
English  the English are a nation of 
shopkeepers
Englishman  an Englishman’s home is 
his castle See a man’s home is his castle
enjoy  gossip is vice enjoyed vicariously
if there were no clouds, we shouldn’t 
enjoy the sun
enough  enough is as good as a feast
enough is enough
too many chiefs and not enough Indians
a word is enough to the wise See a word to 
the wise is suffi cient
enter  a bribe will enter without knocking
envy  better be envied than pitied
envy never dies
equal  all animals are equal, but some 
are more equal than others
all men are created equal
equality  equality begins in the grave
err  to err is human, to forgive divine
errare  humanum est errare See to err is 
human, to forgive divine
escape  little thieves are hanged, but 
great ones escape
eternal  hope springs eternal in the 
human breast
the price of liberty is eternal vigilance
Eve  when Adam delved and Eve span, 
who was then the gentleman?
Index by Key Word
352
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd352   352 1/29/07   5:24:06 PM
even  the best way to get even is to 
forget
don’t get mad, get even
never give a sucker an even break
evening  an hour in the morning is 
worth two in the evening
evensong  be the day weary or be the 
day long, at last it ringeth to evensong
event  coming events cast their shadows 
before
it’s easy to be wise after the event
everybody  everybody’s business is 
nobody’s business
everybody’s queer but you and me, and 
even you are a little queer
what everybody says must be true
you can’t please everybody
everything  everything has an end
everything is good in its season
money isn’t everything
a place for everything and everything in 
its place
there’s a fi rst time for everything
there’s a time and place for everything
timing is everything
to everything there is a season
winning isn’t everything, it’s the only 
thing
evidence  what the soldier said isn’t 
evidence
evil  choose the lesser of two evils
corruption will fi nd a dozen alibis for its 
evil deeds
evil be to him who thinks it
evil communications corrupt good man-
ners
evil doers are evil dreaders
a great book is a great evil
idleness is the root of all evil
the love of money is the root of all evil
money is the root of all evil
never do evil that good may come of it
see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil
suffi cient unto the day is the evil thereof
ex  ex nihilo nihil fi t See nothing comes 
of nothing
example  example is better than precept
a good example is the best sermon
exceedingly  the mills of God grind 
slowly, yet they grind exceedingly 
small
excellent  when house and land are 
gone and spent, then learning is most 
excellent
exception  the exception proves the 
rule
self-interest is the rule, self-sacrifi ce the 
exception
there’s an exception to every rule
exchange  a fair exchange is no rob-
bery
excuse  the absent are never without 
fault nor the present without excuse 
See he who is absent is always in the 
wrong
accusing the times is but excusing our-
selves
a bad excuse is better than none
he who excuses himself accuses himself
he who is good at making excuses is sel-
dom good at anything else
ignorance of the law is no excuse
excuse  qui s’excuse, s’accuse See he who 
excuses himself accuses himself
exist  if God did not exist, it would be 
necessary to invent him
expand  work expands so as to fi ll the 
time available for its completion
expect  blessed are they who expect noth-
ing, for they shall not be disappointed
what can you expect from a pig but a 
grunt?
experience  experience is a comb that 
fate gives a man when his hair is all 
gone
experience is the best teacher
Index by Key Word
353
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd353   353 1/29/07   5:24:06 PM
experience is the mother of wisdom
experience is the teacher of fools
experience keeps a dear school
some folks speak from experience; oth-
ers, from experience, don’t speak
extreme  extremes meet
extremity  man’s extremity is God’s 
opportunity
eye  beauty is in the eye of the beholder
the buyer needs a thousand eyes, the 
seller wants but one
an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth
the eye is bigger than the belly
the eye of a master does more work than 
both his hands
the eyes are the mirrors of the soul
fi elds have eyes and woods have ears
four eyes see more than two
hawks will not pick out hawks’ eyes
in the country of the blind, the one-eyed 
man is king
keep your eyes wide open before mar-
riage, half shut afterward
keep your mouth shut and your eyes 
open
love is blind; friendship closes its eyes
please your eye and plague your heart
what the eye doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t 
grieve over
fable  history is a fable agreed upon
face  don’t cut off your nose to spite 
your face
the face is the index of the mind See the 
eyes are the mirrors of the soul
a good face is a letter of recommenda-
tion
the joy of the heart makes the face fair 
See a merry heart makes a cheerful 
countenance
Monday’s child is fair of face
fact  fact is stranger than fi ction
facts are stubborn things
fail  when all fruit fails, welcome haws
failure  success has many fathers, while 
failure is an orphan
success is never fi nal and failure is never 
fatal See success is never fi nal
faint  faint heart never won fair lady
fair  all’s fair in love and war
faint heart never won fair lady
fair and softly goes far in a day
a fair exchange is no robbery
fair feathers make fair fowl See fi ne feath-
ers make fi ne birds
fair play’s a jewel
fair words butter no cabbage See fi ne 
words butter no parsnips
give and take is fair play
hoist your sail when the wind is fair
it’s always fair weather when good friends 
get together
the joy of the heart makes the face fair 
See a merry heart makes a cheerful 
countenance
Monday’s child is fair of face
none but the brave deserve the fair
soft and fair goes far
turnabout is fair play
faith  faith will move mountains
fall  the apple never falls far from the 
tree
as a tree falls, so shall it lie
between two stools one falls to the 
ground
the bigger they are, the harder they fall
bread always falls buttered side down
a creaking door never falls from its hinges 
See a creaking door hangs longest
the falling out of lovers is the renewing 
of love See the quarrel of lovers is the 
renewal of love
happy is the bride that the sun shines on, 
blessed is the corpse that the rain falls 
on See happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on
hasty climbers have sudden falls
Index by Key Word
354
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd354   354 1/29/07   5:24:06 PM
he that is down need fear no fall
if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch
if the sky falls, we shall catch larks
into every life a little rain must fall
let the chips fall where they may
pride goes before a fall
a reed before the wind lives on, while 
mighty oaks do fall
a stumble may prevent a fall
united we stand, divided we fall
when thieves fall out, honest men come 
by their own
worry is interest paid on trouble before 
it falls due
fame  common fame is seldom to 
blame
everybody has his fi fteen minutes of fame
familiarity  familiarity breeds contempt
family  accidents will happen in the 
best-regulated families
every family has a skeleton in the closet 
See there’s a skeleton in every closet
the family that prays together stays 
together
there’s a black sheep in every family See 
there’s a black sheep in every fl ock
famine  more die of food than famine
fancy  fancy passes beauty 
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love
a little of what you fancy does you good
far  the apple never falls far from the tree
blue are the hills that are far away
fair and softly goes far in a day
far-fetched and dear-bought is good for 
ladies
the farthest way about is the nearest way 
home See the longest way around is the 
shortest way home
go farther and fare worse
knowledge and wisdom are far from 
being one
the nearer the church, the farther from 
God
stretch your arm no further than your 
sleeve will reach
Thursday’s child has far to go
fare  go farther and fare worse
farther, farthest  See far
fashion  better be out of the world than 
out of the fashion
every man after his fashion
fast  bad news travels fast
he that lives on hope will die fasting
he travels fastest who travels alone
it’s ill speaking between a full man and 
a fasting
fat  a fat kitchen makes a lean will
a green winter makes a fat churchyard
laugh and grow fat
the opera ain’t over till the fat lady sings
fatal  success is never fi nal and failure is 
never fatal See success is never fi nal
fate  experience is a comb that fate 
gives a man when his hair is all gone
father  the child is father of the man
experience is the father of wisdom See 
experience is the mother of wisdom
it’s a wise child that knows its own father
like father, like son
success has many fathers, while failure is 
an orphan
the wish is father to the thought
fault  the absent are never without fault 
nor the present without excuse See he 
who is absent is always in the wrong
a fault confessed is half redressed
faults are thick where love is thin
great men have great faults
an honest look covereth many faults
wink at small faults
favor  fortune favors fools
fortune favors the brave
kissing goes by favor
Index by Key Word
355
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd355   355 1/29/07   5:24:06 PM
fear  courage is fear that has said its 
prayers
the doctor is often more to be feared than 
the disease
do right and fear no man
fear lends wings
fear the Greeks bearing gifts See beware of 
greeks bearing gifts
fools rush in where angels fear to tread
he that is down need fear no fall
the only thing we have to fear is fear 
itself
feast  the company makes the feast
a contented mind is a continual feast
enough is as good as a feast
feather  birds of a feather flock 
together
fi ne feathers make fi ne birds
feed  the appetite grows on what it feeds 
on See appetite comes with eating
don’t bite the hand that feeds you
feed a cold and starve a fever
give a man a fi sh, and you feed him for 
a day; show him how to fi sh, and you 
feed him for a lifetime
God never sends a mouth but he feeds 
it See God never sends mouths but he 
sends meat
feel  a man is as old as he feels, and a 
woman as old as she looks
pride feels no pain
the way to be safe is never to feel secure 
See he that is too secure is not safe
feet  See foot
fell  little strokes fell great oaks
fellow  stone-dead hath no fellow
fellowship  a hedge between keeps fel-
lowship green See a hedge between 
keeps friendship green
female  the female of the species is 
deadlier than the male
fence  don’t take down a fence unless 
you are sure why it was put up
good fences make good neighbors
the grass is always greener on the other 
side of the fence
festina  festina lente See make haste 
slowly
fetch  a dog that will fetch a bone will 
carry a bone
far-fetched and dear-bought is good for 
ladies
fever  feed a cold and starve a fever
few  books and friends should be few 
and good
few words are best
he who begins many things, fi nishes but 
few
many are called, but few are chosen
patience is a virtue which few possess—
some have a little, others have less See 
patience is a virtue
you win a few, you lose a few See you win 
some, you lose some
fi ction  fact is stranger than fi ction
truth is stranger than fi ction
fiddle  Nero fiddled while Rome 
burned
there’s many a good tune played on an 
old fi ddle
fi ddler  they that dance must pay the 
fi ddler
fi eld  fi elds have eyes and woods have 
ears
fi eld-marshal  every soldier has the 
baton of a fi eld-marshal in his knapsack
fi erce  the lion is not so fi erce as he is 
painted
fi fteen  everybody has his fi fteen min-
utes of fame
fi ght  councils of war never fi ght
fi ght fi re with fi re
he who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day
it’s not the size of the dog in the fi ght, it’s 
the size of the fi ght in the dog
Index by Key Word
356
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd356   356 1/29/07   5:24:07 PM
war will cease when men refuse to fi ght
while two dogs are fi ghting for a bone, a 
third runs away with it
you can’t fi ght City Hall
fi ll  little and often fi lls the purse
work expands so as to fi ll the time avail-
able for its completion
fi nal  success is never fi nal
fi nd  ask, and it shall be given you; seek, 
and ye shall fi nd; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you
the devil fi nds work for idle hands to do
fi nd a penny, pick it up See see a pin and 
pick it up
fi nding is keeping
a good man is hard to fi nd See good men 
are scarce
the husband is always the last to fi nd out 
See the husband is always the last to 
know
it’s easy to fi nd a stick to beat a dog
keep a thing seven years and you’ll fi nd 
a use for it
love will fi nd a way
opportunities look for you when you are 
worth fi nding
safe bind, safe fi nd
scratch a Russian and you fi nd a Tartar
seek and you shall fi nd
those who hide can fi nd
water fi nds its own level See water seeks 
its own level
winter fi nds out what summer lays up
fi nder  fi nders keepers, losers weepers
fi ne  fi ne feathers make fi ne birds
fi ne words butter no parsnips
the mills of God grind slowly, but they 
grind exceedingly fi ne See the mills 
of God grind slowly, yet they grind 
exceedingly small
most people consider thrift a fi ne virtue 
in ancestors
rain before seven, fi ne before eleven
fi nger  the devil makes his Christmas 
pies of lawyers’ tongues and clerks’ 
fi ngers
fi ngers were made before forks
fi nish  don’t start anything you can’t 
fi nish
he who begins many things, fi nishes but 
few
nice guys fi nish last
fi re  better a little fi re to warm us than a 
big one to burn us
a burnt child dreads the fi re
dirty water will quench fi re
don’t jump from the frying pan into the 
fi re
fi ght fi re with fi re
fi re is a good servant but a bad master
if you play with fi re, you get burned
much smoke, little fi re
there’s no smoke without fi re
three moves are as bad as a fi re
you should know a man seven years 
before you stir his fi re
fi reside  heated arguments do not warm 
the fi reside See the only thing a heated 
argument ever produced is coolness
fi rst  better be fi rst in a village than 
second at Rome
fi rst catch your hare
fi rst come, fi rst served
the fi rst duty of a soldier is obedience
the fi rst hundred years are the hardest
fi rst impressions are the most lasting
the fi rst seven years are the hardest
the fi rst step is the hardest
fi rst things fi rst
fi rst think, and then speak See think before 
you speak
fi rst thrive and then wive
fi rst try and then trust
if at fi rst you don’t succeed, try, try again
let him who is without sin cast the fi rst 
stone
Index by Key Word
357
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd357   357 1/29/07   5:24:07 PM
pleasure fi rst and business after See busi-
ness before pleasure
safety fi rst
self-preservation is the fi rst law of nature
shoot fi rst and ask questions afterward
there’s a fi rst time for everything
think fi rst and speak afterward See think 
before you speak
truth is the fi rst casualty of war
which came fi rst, the chicken or the 
egg?
whom the gods would destroy, they fi rst 
make mad
fi sh  all fi sh are not caught with fl ies
all is fi sh that comes to the net
better a big fi sh in a little pond than a little 
fi sh in a big pond
big fi sh eat little fi sh
the cat would eat fi sh, but would not wet 
her feet
fi sh and guests stink after three days
fi sh or cut bait
a fi sh stinks from the head
fi sh where the fi sh are
give a man a fi sh, and you feed him for 
a day; show him how to fi sh, and you 
feed him for a lifetime
the hook without bait catches no fi sh
it’s good fi shing in troubled waters
little fi sh are sweet
there are other fi sh in the sea
fi t  God fi ts the back to the burden See 
God makes the back to the burden
if the shoe fi ts, wear it
silence is the fi ttest reply to folly
a whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men
fi t  ex nihilo nihil fi t See nothing comes 
of nothing
fi ve  two’s a couple, three’s a crowd, 
four’s too many, and fi ve’s not allowed 
See two’s company, three’s a crowd
fi x  if it ain’t broke, don’t fi x it
fl ag  trade follows the fl ag
fl ash  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; 
creep under the thorn, it can save you 
from harm
fl attery  fl attery, like perfume, should 
be smelled but not swallowed
imitation is the sincerest form of fl attery
fl aunt  if you’ve got it, fl aunt it
fl ea  big fl eas have little fl eas upon their 
backs to bite ’em, and little fl eas have 
lesser fl eas, and so ad infi nitum
if you lie down with dogs, you’ll get up 
with fl eas
nothing should be done in haste but grip-
ping a fl ea
fl esh  the nearer the bone, the sweeter 
the fl esh
the spirit is willing but the fl esh is weak
what’s bred in the bone will come out in 
the fl esh
fl ew  See fl y (v.)
fl ight  blessings brighten as they take 
their fl ight
one courageous thought will put to fl ight 
a host of troubles
fl ing  fl ing dirt enough, and some will 
stick See throw dirt enough, and some 
will stick
youth will have its fl ing
fl ock  birds of a feather fl ock together
there’s a black sheep in every fl ock
fl ower  April showers bring May fl ow-
ers
fl owers leave fragrance in the hand that 
bestows them
fl y (n.)  all fi sh are not caught with fl ies
eagles don’t catch fl ies
a shut mouth catches no fl ies
you can catch more fl ies with honey than 
with vinegar
you must lose a fl y to catch a trout See 
throw out a sprat to catch a mackerel
Index by Key Word
358
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd358   358 1/29/07   5:24:07 PM
fl y (v.)  a bird in the hand is worth a 
hundred fl ying See a bird in the hand is 
worth two in the bush
a bird never fl ew on one wing
birds of a feather fl y together See birds of 
a feather fl ock together
if a pig had wings, it might fl y
it’s good to make a bridge of gold to a 
fl ying enemy
time fl ies
when poverty comes in at the door, love 
fl ies out of the window
you can’t keep the birds from fl ying over 
your head, but you can keep them from 
building a nest in your hair
folk  busy folks are always meddling
different strokes for different folks
some folks speak from experience; oth-
ers, from experience, don’t speak
there’s nowt so queer as folk
threatened folks live the longest See 
threatened men live long
young folks think old folks to be fools, but 
old folks know young folks to be fools
follow  if one sheep leaps over the ditch, 
all the rest will follow
trade follows the fl ag
follower  a good leader is also a good 
follower
folly  anger without power is folly
silence is the fi ttest reply to folly
where ignorance is bliss, ’tis folly to be 
wise See ignorance is bliss
fond  absence makes the heart grow 
fonder
food  food without hospitality is medi-
cine
more die of food than famine
fool  children and fools speak the truth
experience is the teacher of fools
experience keeps a dear school, but fools 
will learn in no other See experience 
keeps a dear school
a fool and his money are soon parted
a fool at forty is a fool indeed
a fool may give a wise man counsel
fool me once, shame on you; fool me 
twice, shame on me
fools and children should never see half-
done work
fools ask questions that wise men cannot 
answer
a fool’s bolt is soon shot
fools build houses and wise men live in 
them
fools rush in where angels fear to tread
fortune favors fools
a man who is his own lawyer has a fool 
for his client
send a fool to market and a fool he’ll 
return
six hours’ sleep for a man, seven for a 
woman, and eight for a fool
there’s no fool like an old fool
when you argue with a fool, make sure he 
isn’t similarly engaged
a white wall is the fool’s writing paper
a wise man changes his mind, but a fool 
never does
wise men learn by other men’s mistakes, 
fools by their own See learn from the 
mistakes of others
you can fool some of the people all of 
the time, and all of the people some of 
the time, but you can’t fool all of the 
people all of the time
young folks think old folks to be fools, 
but old folks know young folks to 
be fools
foolish  a foolish consistency is the hob-
goblin of little minds
it’s a foolish sheep that makes the wolf his 
confessor
penny wise and pound foolish
foot  the cat would eat fi sh, but would 
not wet her feet
Index by Key Word
359
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd359   359 1/29/07   5:24:07 PM
conscience gets a lot of credit that belongs 
to cold feet
it’s better to die on your feet than live on 
your knees
it’s not spring until you can plant your 
foot upon twelve daisies
put your best foot forward
the shoe is on the other foot
stand on your own two feet
use your head and save your feet See let 
your head save your heels
footprint  footprints on the sands of 
time are not made by sitting down
forbear  bear and forbear
forbid  forbidden fruit is sweet
forearm  forewarned is forearmed
forelock  take time by the forelock
foretell  long foretold, long last; short 
notice, soon past
forewarn  forewarned is forearmed
forget  a bellowing cow soon forgets 
her calf
the best way to get even is to forget
the danger past and God forgotten
an elephant never forgets
forgive and forget
live and learn; die and forget See live and 
learn
nobody forgets a good teacher
seldom seen, soon forgotten
forgive  forgive and forget
to err is human, to forgive divine
to know all is to forgive all
young men forgive, old men never See 
youth and old age will never agree
fork  fi ngers were made before forks
form  attack is the best form of defense 
See the best defense is a good offense
imitation is the sincerest form of fl attery
fortune  every man is the architect of 
his own fortune
fortune favors fools
fortune favors the brave
he that has a wife and children has given 
hostages to fortune
the wheel of fortune is forever in motion
forty  a fool at forty is a fool indeed
life begins at forty
forward  put your best foot forward
foul  it’s an ill bird that fouls its own 
nest
four  a church is God between four 
walls
four eyes see more than two
one for sorrow; two for mirth; three for a 
wedding; four for a birth
there goes more to marriage than four 
bare legs in a bed
two and two make four
two’s a couple, three’s a crowd, four’s too 
many, and fi ve’s not allowed See two’s 
company, three’s a crowd
fowl  fair feathers make fair fowl See fi ne 
feathers make fi ne birds
fox  don’t let the fox guard the hen-
house
the fox preys furthest from his hole
an old fox is not easily snared
fragrance  fl owers leave fragrance in 
the hand that bestows them
free  the best things in life are free
love is free
there’s no such thing as a free lunch
thought is free
why buy the cow when you can get the 
milk for free? 
freely  nothing is given so freely as 
advice
Friday  Friday’s child is loving and giving
friend  be kind to your friends; if it 
weren’t for them, you would be a total 
stranger
the best of friends must part
books and friends should be few and 
good
a dog is a man’s best friend
Index by Key Word
360
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd360   360 1/29/07   5:24:07 PM
the enemy of my enemy is my friend
a friend in need is a friend indeed
a friend to all is a friend to none
he that has a full purse never wanted a 
friend
it’s always fair weather when good friends 
get together
lend your money and lose your friend
old friends and old wine are best
save us from our friends
short reckonings make long friends
short visits make long friends
trust not a new friend nor an old enemy
wealth makes many friends
with friends like that, who needs enemies?
friendship  a hedge between keeps 
friendship green
love is blind; friendship closes its eyes
fright  burn not your house to fright the 
mouse away See burn not your house to 
scare away the mice
frog  if frogs had wings, they wouldn’t 
bump their tails on rocks See if a pig 
had wings, it might fl y
front  the best place for criticism is in 
front of your mirror
fruit  deeds are fruits, words are but 
leaves
forbidden fruit is sweet
he that would eat the fruit must climb 
the tree
stolen fruit is sweet See stolen waters are 
sweet
the tree is known by its fruit
when all fruit fails, welcome haws
fry  don’t jump from the frying pan into 
the fi re
fugit  tempus fugit See time fl ies
full  full cup, steady hand
the glass is either half empty or half full
he that has a full purse never wanted a 
friend
it’s ill speaking between a full man and 
a fasting
Tuesday’s child is full of grace
Wednesday’s child is full of woe
the wheel comes full circle
fullness  out of the fullness of the heart 
the mouth speaks
funeral  dream of a funeral and you hear 
of a marriage
one funeral makes many
funny  a rich man’s joke is always funny
further  See far
fury  hell hath no fury like a woman 
scorned
future  the future ain’t what it used to be
a man’s best reputation for the future is 
his record of the past
gain  light gains make heavy purses
no pain, no gain
nothing ventured, nothing gained
one man’s loss is another man’s gain
politeness costs nothing and gains every-
thing See civility costs nothing
there’s no great loss without some gain
what you lose on the swings you gain on 
the roundabouts
gale  hoist up the sail while the gale 
does last See hoist your sail when the 
wind is fair
gamble  gambling is getting nothing for 
something
game  don’t change the rules in the 
middle of the game
the game is not worth the candle
it’s not whether you win or lose, but how 
you play the game
lookers-on see most of the game
you can’t beat a man at his own game
gamekeeper  an old poacher makes the 
best gamekeeper
gander  what’s sauce for the goose is 
sauce for the gander
Index by Key Word
361
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd361   361 1/29/07   5:24:07 PM
gang  the best-laid schemes of mice and 
men gang aft a-gley
garbage  garbage in, garbage out
garden  a book is like a garden carried 
in the pocket
if you would be happy for a week take 
a wife; if you would be happy for a 
month kill a pig; but if you would be 
happy all your life plant a garden
gasoline  whiskey and gasoline don’t 
mix
gate  a creaking gate hangs longest See a 
creaking door hangs longest
Gath  tell it not in Gath
gather  gather ye rosebuds while ye may
a rolling stone gathers no moss
where the carcass is, there will the eagles 
be gathered
gay  the child that is born on the Sab-
bath day is bonny and blithe and good 
and gay
geese  See goose
general  war is too important to be left 
to the generals
what’s good for General Motors is good 
for America
generation  from shirtsleeves to shirt-
sleeves is only three generations
it takes three generations to make a 
gentleman
generous  be just before you’re gener-
ous
genius  genius is an infi nite capacity for 
taking pains
genius is one percent inspiration and 
ninety-nine percent perspiration
genius without education is like silver in 
the mine
gentleman  a gentleman’s word is his 
bond See a man’s word is as good as 
his bond
it takes three generations to make a 
gentleman
when Adam delved and Eve span, who 
was then the gentleman?
gently  drive gently over the stones
gently does it See easy does it
get  the best way to get even is to forget
don’t get mad, get even
don’t wish too hard; you might just get 
what you wished for
ill-gotten goods never thrive
money gets money See money begets 
money
the more you get, the more you want
piss or get off the pot
saving is getting
what’s got over the devil’s back is spent 
under his belly
what you see is what you get
when the going gets tough, the tough get 
going
you can’t get blood from a stone
you don’t get something for nothing
you get nothing for nothing See nothing 
for nothing
you get what you pay for
you never get anything for nothing See 
nothing for nothing
giant  a dwarf on a giant’s shoulders sees 
further of the two
gift  beware of Greeks bearing gifts
never look a gift horse in the mouth
a small gift usually gets small thanks
gill  every herring must hang by its 
own gill
girl  boys seldom make passes at girls 
who wear glasses
one for sorrow, two for joy, three for a 
girl, and four for a boy See one for sor-
row; two for mirth; three for a wed-
ding; four for a birth
a whistling girl and a crowing hen always 
come to the same bad end See a whis-
tling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men
Index by Key Word
362
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd362   362 1/29/07   5:24:08 PM
git  them as asks, gits
them as don’t ask, don’t git See ask, and 
it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall 
fi nd; knock, and it shall be opened 
unto you
give  ask, and it shall be given you; seek, 
and ye shall fi nd; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you
don’t give up the ship
everybody to whom much is given, of him 
will much be required
Friday’s child is loving and giving
give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it to 
death
give a civil answer to a civil question See a 
civil question deserves a civil answer
give a loaf and beg a slice
give a dog a bad name and hang him
give a man a fi sh, and you feed him for 
a day; show him how to fi sh, and you 
feed him for a lifetime
give a man an inch and he’ll take a mile
give a man enough rope and he’ll hang 
himself
give and take is fair play
give a thing, and take a thing, to wear the 
devil’s gold ring
give credit where credit is due
give me a child for the fi rst seven years 
and he is mine for life
give the devil his due
he gives twice who gives quickly
it’s better to give than to receive
the Lord gives and the Lord takes away
neither give nor take offense
never give a sucker an even break
nothing is given so freely as advice
glass  the glass is either half empty or 
half full
people who live in glass houses shouldn’t 
throw stones
glasses  boys seldom make passes at 
girls who wear glasses
glitter  all that glitters is not gold
glove  a cat in gloves catches no mice
gluttony  gluttony kills more than the 
sword
go  as Maine goes, so goes the nation
the best-laid schemes of mice and men oft 
go astray See the best-laid schemes of 
mice and men gang aft a-gley
the clock goes as it pleases the clerk
don’t go near the water until you learn 
how to swim
easy come, easy go
fair and softly goes far in a day
go abroad and you’ll hear news of home
go farther and fare worse
good Americans, when they die, go to 
Paris
he that goes a-borrowing, goes a-sorrow-
ing
he that would go to sea for pleasure would 
go to hell for a pastime
he that would learn to pray, let him go 
to sea
he who has a tiger by the tail dare not let 
go See he who rides a tiger is afraid to 
dismount
if anything can go wrong, it will
if the mountain will not come to Moham-
med, Mohammed must go to the 
mountain
laws go as kings like
a lie can go around the world and back again 
while the truth is lacing up its boots
love makes the world go round
many go out for wool and come home 
shorn
March comes in like a lion, and goes out 
like a lamb
money makes the mare go
money makes the world go round
much water goes by the mill that the 
miller knows not of
never let the sun go down on your anger
Index by Key Word
363
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd363   363 1/29/07   5:24:08 PM
nothing goes over the back but that 
comes under the belly See what’s got 
over the devil’s back is spent under 
his belly
pay as you go and nothing you’ll owe
the pitcher will go to the well once too 
often
pride goes before a fall
quickly come, quickly go
the show must go on
Thursday’s child has far to go
two tailors go to a man See nine tailors 
make a man
what goes around, comes around
what goes up must come down
when house and land are gone and spent, 
then learning is most excellent
when the going gets tough, the tough get 
going
when the worst comes, the worst is going 
See when things are at the worst they 
begin to mend
when you go to dance, take heed whom 
you take by the hand
wisdom goes beyond strength
you can’t go home again
you can’t take it with you when you go See 
you can’t take it with you
God, god  all things are possible with 
God
a church is God between four walls
every man for himself and God for us all
God helps those who help themselves
God is always on the side of the big bat-
talions See providence is always on the 
side of the big battalions
God is in the details See the devil is in the 
details
God made the country and man made 
the town
God makes the back to the burden
God moves in mysterious ways
God never sends mouths but he sends 
meat
God protect me from my friends—I can 
protect myself from my enemies See 
save us from our friends
God sends meat, but the devil sends 
cooks
God’s in his heaven; all’s right with the 
world
the gods send nuts to those who have no 
teeth
God takes soonest those he loves best
God tempers the wind to the shorn lamb
if God did not exist, it would be necessary 
to invent him
man proposes, God disposes
man’s extremity is God’s opportunity
the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceedingly small
the nearer the church, the farther from 
God
poverty comes from God, but not dirt
put your trust in God, and keep your 
powder dry
the robin and the wren are God’s cock 
and hen
take the goods the gods provide
the voice of the people is the voice of 
God
where God builds a church, the devil will 
build a chapel
a whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men
whom the gods love die young
whom the gods would destroy, they fi rst 
make mad
you can’t serve God and mammon
godliness  cleanliness is next to godli-
ness
gold  all that glitters is not gold
give a thing, and take a thing, to wear the 
devil’s gold ring
gold may be bought too dear
Index by Key Word
364
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd364   364 1/29/07   5:24:08 PM
it’s good to make a bridge of gold to a 
fl ying enemy
there’s a pot of gold at the end of the 
rainbow
golden  don’t kill the goose that lays the 
golden eggs
the golden age was never the present age
a golden key can open any door
silence is golden
speech is silver, but silence is golden
gone  See go
good  all good things come in threes See 
things come in threes
all good things come to those who wait
all good things must come to an end
any publicity is good publicity
as good be an addled egg as an idle bird
bad money drives out good
beauty is a good letter of introduction
the best defense is a good offense
the best is the enemy of the good
better a good cow than a cow of a good 
kind
books and friends should be few and 
good
a change is as good as a rest
the child that is born on the Sabbath day is 
bonny and blithe and good and gay
confession is good for the soul
diligence is the mother of good luck
don’t throw good money after bad
enough is as good as a feast
everything is good in its season
evil communications corrupt good man-
ners
far-fetched and dear-bought is good for 
ladies
fi re is a good servant but a bad master
good Americans, when they die, go to 
Paris
a good beginning is half the battle
a good beginning makes a good ending
good company on the road is the short-
est cut
the good die young
a good dog deserves a good bone
a good example is the best sermon
a good face is a letter of recommendation
good fences make good neighbors
good health is more to be desired than 
wealth See health is wealth
a good horse cannot be of a bad color
a good husband makes a good wife
the good is the enemy of the best
a good Jack makes a good Jill
a good leader is also a good follower
good men are scarce
a good name is better than precious 
ointment
a good name is sooner lost than won
a good reputation is more valuable than 
money
good riddance to bad rubbish
the good seaman is known in bad 
weather
good seed makes a good crop
a good tale is not the worse for being 
told twice
the good that men do lives after them
good things come in small packages See 
the best things come in small packages
good to forgive, best to forget See forgive 
and forget
good wine needs no bush
the hair of the dog is good for the bite See 
take a hair of the dog that bit you
haste makes waste, and waste makes 
want, and want makes strife between a 
good man and his wife See haste makes 
waste
he who is good at making excuses is sel-
dom good at anything else
hope is a good breakfast but a bad supper
if and an spoils many a good charter
if you can’t be good, be careful
Index by Key Word
365
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd365   365 1/29/07   5:24:08 PM
an ill agreement is better than a good 
judgment
it’s a good horse that never stumbles See a 
stumble may prevent a fall
it’s always fair weather when good friends 
get together
it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any 
good
it’s good fi shing in troubled waters
it’s good to make a bridge of gold to a 
fl ying enemy
Jack’s as good as his master
leave off while the play is good See quit 
while you are ahead
a liar should have a good memory
listeners never hear any good of them-
selves
a little absence does much good
a little of what you fancy does you good
a man’s word is as good as his bond
a miss is as good as a mile
never do evil that good may come of it
nobody forgets a good teacher
a nod’s as good as a wink to a blind horse
no good deed goes unpunished
no news is good news
one good turn deserves another
one story is good till another is told
the road to hell is paved with good inten-
tions
a secret is either too good to keep or too 
bad not to tell
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, 
bad luck you’ll have all the day
there are as good fi sh in the sea as ever 
came out of it See there are other fi sh 
in the sea
there’s good and bad in everything
there’s many a good cock come out of a 
tattered bag
there’s many a good tune played on an 
old fi ddle
there’s nothing so good for the inside of a 
man as the outside of a horse
what’s good for General Motors is good 
for America
you can have too much of a good thing
you have to take the bad with the good 
See you have to take the bitter with 
the sweet
goodness  beauty is only skin-deep, but 
goodness goes to the bone See beauty is 
only skin-deep
goods  ill-gotten goods never thrive
take the goods the gods provide
goose  don’t kill the goose that lays the 
golden eggs
every man thinks his own geese swans
a goose quill is more dangerous than a 
lion’s claw
what’s sauce for the goose is sauce for 
the gander
gossip  gossip is the lifeblood of society
gossip is vice enjoyed vicariously
got, gotten  See get
goût  chacun à son goût See every man to 
his taste
govern  that government is best which 
governs least
government  governments have long 
arms See kings have long arms
that government is best which governs 
least
grace  blushing is a sign of grace
grace will last, beauty will blast
Tuesday’s child is full of grace
grain  little drops of water, little grains 
of sand, make a mighty ocean and a 
pleasant land
grandmother  don’t teach your grand-
mother to suck eggs
grasp  grasp no more than the hand 
will hold
grass  the grass is always greener on the 
other side of the fence
Index by Key Word
366
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd366   366 1/29/07   5:24:08 PM
while the grass grows, the steed starves
gratitude  don’t overload gratitude; if 
you do, she’ll kick
grave  equality begins in the grave
there’ll be sleeping enough in the grave
gray  all cats are gray in the dark
the gray mare is the better horse
grease  the squeaky wheel gets the 
grease
great  behind every great man there is a 
great woman
death is the great leveler
great boats may venture more, but little 
boats should keep near shore See little 
boats should stay close to shore
a great book is a great evil
a great city, a great solitude
great cry but little wool See much cry and 
little wool
the greater the truth, the greater the 
libel
great men have great faults
great minds think alike
great oaks from little acorns grow
great trees keep down little ones
a half-truth is often a great lie See half the 
truth is often a whole lie
little strokes fell great oaks
little thieves are hanged, but great ones 
escape
out of the mouths of babes and sucklings 
come great truths
poverty is no disgrace, but it’s a great 
inconvenience
small sorrows speak; great ones are silent
there’s no great loss without some gain
thrift is a great revenue
time is a great healer
Greek  beware of Greeks bearing gifts
when Greek meets Greek, then comes the 
tug of war
green  far away the hills are green See 
blue are the hills that are far away
the grass is always greener on the other 
side of the fence
a green winter makes a fat churchyard
a hedge between keeps friendship green
grieve  what the eye doesn’t see, the 
heart doesn’t grieve over
grind  the mill cannot grind with the 
water that is past
the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceedingly small
grip  nothing should be done in haste 
but gripping a fl ea
grist  all is grist that comes to the mill
ground  between two stools one falls to 
the ground
grow  absence makes the heart grow 
fonder
the appetite grows on what it feeds on See 
appetite comes with eating
as the twig is bent, the child will grow 
See as the twig is bent, so is the tree 
inclined
great oaks from little acorns grow
a growing youth has a wolf in his stom-
ach
ill weeds grow apace
laugh and grow fat
money doesn’t grow on trees
one for the mouse, one for the crow, one 
to rot, one to grow
a tale grows better in the telling See a tale 
never loses in the telling
while the grass grows, the steed starves
grunt  what can you expect from a pig 
but a grunt?
guard  don’t let the fox guard the hen-
house
guest  a constant guest is never welcome
fi sh and guests stink after three days
guilty  a guilty conscience needs no 
accuser
a man is innocent until proven guilty
Index by Key Word
367
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd367   367 1/29/07   5:24:09 PM
gun  love your enemy, but don’t put a 
gun in his hand
stick to your guns
gunner  the cobbler to his last and the 
gunner to his linstock See let the cob-
bler stick to his last
gustibus  De gustibus non est disputandum 
See there’s no disputing about tastes
gutter  who repairs not his gutters 
repairs his whole house
guy  nice guys fi nish last
habet  necessitas non habet legem See 
necessity knows no law
habit  the habit does not make the monk 
See the cowl does not make the monk
old habits die hard
had  See have
hair  beauty draws with a single hair
experience is a comb that fate gives a man 
when his hair is all gone
take a hair of the dog that bit you
you can’t keep the birds from fl ying over 
your head, but you can keep them from 
building a nest in your hair
half  believe only half of what you see 
and nothing you hear
don’t spoil the ship for half a penny’s 
worth of tar
a fault confessed is half redressed
fools and children should never see half-
done work
the glass is either half empty or half full
a good beginning is half the battle
half a loaf is better than no bread
the half is better than the whole
half the truth is often a whole lie
he that has an ill name is half hanged See 
give a dog a bad name and hang him
it’s six of one and half a dozen of the 
other
keep your eyes wide open before mar-
riage, half shut afterward
never do things by halves
one half of the world doesn’t know how 
the other half lives
two boys are half a boy, and three boys are 
no boy at all
well begun is half done
halfway  don’t meet troubles halfway
a lie is halfway round the world before 
the truth has got its boots on See a 
lie can go around the world and back 
again while the truth is lacing up its 
boots
hall  it’s merry in hall when beards wag 
all
you can’t fi ght City Hall
halloo  don’t halloo till you are out of 
the woods See don’t shout until you are 
out of the woods
halve  a trouble shared is a trouble 
halved
hammer  the church is an anvil which 
has worn out many hammers
when all you have is a hammer, everything 
looks like a nail
hand  a bird in the hand is worth two 
in the bush
cold hands, warm heart
the devil fi nds work for idle hands to do
don’t bite the hand that feeds you
the eye of a master does more work than 
both his hands
fl owers leave fragrance in the hand that 
bestows them
full cup, steady hand
grasp no more than the hand will hold
the hand that rocks the cradle rules the 
world
love your enemy, but don’t put a gun in 
his hand
many hands make light work
many kiss the hand they wish to see cut 
off
one hand for yourself and one for the 
ship
Index by Key Word
368
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd368   368 1/29/07   5:24:09 PM
one hand washes the other
time hangs heavy on idle hands
when you go to dance, take heed whom 
you take by the hand
handsome  handsome is as handsome 
does
handy  keep a thing seven years and 
it’s bound to come in handy See keep 
a thing seven years and you’ll fi nd a 
use for it
hang  all words are pegs to hang ideas 
on
catching’s before hanging
confess and be hanged
a creaking door hangs longest
every herring must hang by its own gill
give a dog a bad name and hang him
give a man enough rope and he’ll hang 
himself
hanging and wiving go by destiny
he that would hang his dog gives out fi rst 
that he is mad
home is where you hang your hat
if you’re born to be hanged, then you’ll 
never be drowned
little thieves are hanged, but great ones 
escape
never speak of rope in the house of a man 
who has been hanged
one might as well be hanged for a sheep 
as for a lamb
there are more ways of killing a dog than 
hanging it See there are more ways 
of killing a cat than choking it with 
cream
time hangs heavy on idle hands
ha’porth  don’t spoil the ship for a 
ha’porth of tar See don’t spoil the ship 
for half a penny’s worth of tar
happen  accidents will happen in the 
best-regulated families
shit happens
the unexpected always happens
what has happened once can happen again
worse things happen at sea
happiness  money can’t buy happiness
happy  be happy while you’re living, for 
you’re a long time dead
call no man happy till he dies
a deaf husband and a blind wife are always 
a happy couple
happy is he that is happy in his children
happy is the bride that the sun shines 
on
happy is the country that has no history
happy’s the wooing that’s not long a-
doing
if you would be happy for a week take 
a wife; if you would be happy for a 
month kill a pig; but if you would be 
happy all your life plant a garden
it’s better to be happy than wise
hard  the bigger they are, the harder 
they fall
don’t wish too hard; you might just get 
what you wished for
the fi rst hundred years are the hardest
the fi rst seven years are the hardest
the fi rst step is the hardest
a good man is hard to fi nd See good men 
are scarce
hard cases make bad law
the harder the storm, the sooner it’s over 
See the sharper the storm, the sooner 
it’s over
hard words break no bones
hard work never hurt anybody See work 
never hurt anybody
it’s hard to live in Rome and strive against 
the Pope See it’s ill sitting at Rome and 
striving with the Pope
life is hard by the yard, but by the inch 
life’s a cinch
old habits die hard
Saturday’s child works hard for its living
hare  fi rst catch your hare
Index by Key Word
369
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd369   369 1/29/07   5:24:09 PM
if you run after two hares, you will catch 
neither
you can’t run with the hare and hunt with 
the hounds
harm  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; 
creep under the thorn, it can save you 
from harm
haste  haste is from the devil
haste makes waste
make haste slowly
marry in haste, repent at leisure
more haste, less speed
nothing should be done in haste but 
gripping a fl ea
hasty  the hasty bitch bringeth forth 
blind whelps
hasty climbers have sudden falls
hat  home is where you hang your hat
hatch  don’t count your chickens 
before they are hatched
hate  better a dinner of herbs where 
love is than a stalled ox where hate is
have  hope and have
the more you have, the more you want 
See the more you get, the more you 
want
much would have more
nature will have its course
nothing venture, nothing have See noth-
ing ventured, nothing gained
the only thing we have to fear is fear 
itself
spare and have is better than spend and 
crave
spare well and have to spend
use legs and have legs
what you’ve never had you never miss
a willful man must have his way
you can have too much of a good thing
you can’t have it both ways
you can’t have your cake and eat it too
you can’t lose what you never had
haw  when all fruit fails, welcome 
haws
hawk  hawks will not pick out hawks’ 
eyes
hay  make hay while the sun shines
a wet May brings plenty of hay
head  better be the head of a dog than 
the tail of a lion
education doesn’t come by bumping 
your head against the school house
a fi sh stinks from the head
heads I win, tails you lose
let your head save your heels
a still tongue makes a wise head
two heads are better than one
uneasy lies the head that wears a crown
you can’t keep the birds from fl ying over 
your head, but you can keep them 
from building a nest in your hair
you can’t put an old head on young 
shoulders
heal  physician, heal thyself
time heals all wounds See time is a great 
healer
time will heal See time is a great healer
healer  time is a great healer
health  health is not valued till sick-
ness comes
health is wealth
healthy  early to bed and early to rise, 
makes a man healthy, wealthy, and 
wise
heap  it takes a heap of living to make 
a house a home
hear  ask no questions and hear no lies 
See ask me no questions and I’ll tell 
you no lies
believe only half of what you see and 
nothing you hear
children should be seen and not heard
dream of a funeral and you hear of a 
marriage
hear all, see all say nowt
Index by Key Word
370
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd370   370 1/29/07   5:24:09 PM
listeners never hear any good of them-
selves
see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil
there are none so deaf as those who will 
not hear
the young cock crows as he heard the 
old one
hearse  from the day you were born till 
you ride in a hearse, there’s nothing 
so bad but it might have been worse 
See nothing so bad but it might have 
been worse
heart  absence makes the heart grow 
fonder
cold hands, warm heart
faint heart never won fair lady
a heavy purse makes a light heart
home is where the heart is
hope deferred makes the heart sick
humble hearts have humble desires
if it were not for hope, the heart would 
break
it’s a poor heart that never rejoices
kind hearts are more than coronets
the larger the body, the bigger the heart
a light purse makes a heavy heart
a merry heart makes a cheerful counte-
nance
nothing is impossible to a willing heart
out of the fullness of the heart the mouth 
speaks
please your eye and plague your heart
the way to a man’s heart is through his 
stomach
what the eye doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t 
grieve over
heat  if you can’t stand the heat, get out 
of the kitchen
the only thing a heated argument ever 
produced is coolness
heaven  crosses are ladders that lead to 
heaven
God’s in his heaven; all’s right with the 
world
heaven helps those who help themselves 
See God helps those who help them-
selves
heaven protects children, sailors, and 
drunken men
hell is full of good meanings, but heaven is 
full of good works See the road to hell 
is paved with good intentions
marriages are made in heaven
there’s a season and a time for every 
purpose under the heaven See to every-
thing there is a season
heavy  every horse thinks its own pack 
heaviest
a heavy purse makes a light heart
light gains make heavy purses
a light purse makes a heavy heart
time hangs heavy on idle hands
hedge  a hedge between keeps friend-
ship green
heed  when you go to dance, take heed 
whom you take by the hand
heel  let your head save your heels
heir  walnuts and pears you plant for 
your heirs
hell  hell hath no fury like a woman 
scorned
he that would go to sea for pleasure would 
go to hell for a pastime
old maids lead apes in hell
the road to hell is paved with good inten-
tions
war is hell
help  every little helps
God helps those who help themselves
help you to salt, help you to sorrow
a mouse may help a lion
hen  he that would have eggs must 
endure the cackling of hens
it’s a sad house where the hen crows 
louder than the cock
Index by Key Word
371
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd371   371 1/29/07   5:24:09 PM
the robin and the wren are God’s cock 
and hen
a whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men
hence  it’ll all be the same a hundred 
years hence See it’ll all be the same in a 
hundred years
henhouse  don’t let the fox guard the 
henhouse
herb  better a dinner of herbs where 
love is than a stalled ox where hate is
hero  no man is a hero to his valet
herring  every herring must hang by its 
own gill
hesitate  he who hesitates is lost
hide  don’t hide your light under a bushel
love and a cough cannot be hid
those who hide can fi nd
you can run, but you can’t hide
high  the higher the monkey climbs the 
more he shows his tail
the higher the tree, the sweeter the plum
the highest branch is not the safest roost
imitation is the highest form of fl attery 
See imitation is the sincerest form of 
fl attery
a stream never rises higher than its source 
See a stream cannot rise above its 
source
hill  blue are the hills that are far away
himself  every man for himself and God 
for us all
every man for himself and the devil take 
the hindmost
hinder  meat and mass never hindered 
man
hindmost  every man for himself and 
the devil take the hindmost
hinge  a creaking door never falls from 
its hinges See a creaking door hangs 
longest
hire  the laborer is worthy of his hire
historian  history doesn’t repeat itself—
historians do See history repeats itself
history  happy is the country that has 
no history
history is a fable agreed upon
history repeats itself
hit  don’t hit a man when he’s down
hitch  hitch your wagon to a star
hobgoblin  a foolish consistency is the 
hobgoblin of little minds
hoist  hoist your sail when the wind 
is fair
hold  grasp no more than the hand will 
hold
hole  the fox preys furthest from his hole
the hole calls the thief
if wind blows on you through a hole, say 
your prayers and mind your soul
money burns a hole in the pocket
the mouse that has but one hole is quickly 
taken
when you are in a hole, stop digging
you can’t put a square peg in a round 
hole
home  charity begins at home
curses, like chickens, come home to 
roost
east, west, home’s best
every dog is a lion at home See every cock 
will crow upon his own dunghill
go abroad and you’ll hear news of home
home is home, be it ever so homely
home is where the heart is
home is where you hang your hat
it takes a heap of living to make a house 
a home
the longest way around is the shortest 
way home
a man’s home is his castle
many go out for wool and come home 
shorn
men make houses, women make homes
there’s no place like home
Index by Key Word
372
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd372   372 1/29/07   5:24:09 PM
you can’t go home again
homely  home is home, be it ever so 
homely
Homer  Homer sometimes nods
honest  an honest look covereth many 
faults
an honest man’s word is as good as his 
bond See a man’s word is as good as 
his bond
honest men marry quickly, wise men not 
at all
when thieves fall out, honest men come 
by their own
honesty  beauty and honesty seldom 
agree
honesty is more praised than practiced
honesty is the best policy
honesty pays
honey  where bees are, there is honey
you can catch more fl ies with honey than 
with vinegar
honor  honors change manners
the post of honor is the post of danger
a prophet is not without honor, save in his 
own country
there’s honor among thieves
hoof  three things are not to be trusted: 
a cow’s horn, a dog’s tooth, and a 
horse’s hoof
hook  the hook without bait catches 
no fi sh
hope  he that lives in hope dances to an 
ill tune
he that lives on hope will die fasting
hope and have
hope deferred makes the heart sick
hope for the best and prepare for the 
worst
hope is a good breakfast but a bad supper
hope springs eternal in the human breast
if it were not for hope, the heart would 
break
while there’s life there’s hope
hopefully  it’s better to travel hopefully 
than to arrive
horn  three things are not to be trusted: 
a cow’s horn, a dog’s tooth, and a 
horse’s hoof
toot your own horn lest the same be 
never tooted
horse  better be the head of an ass than 
the tail of a horse See better be the head 
of a dog than the tail of a lion
don’t put the cart before the horse
don’t shut the barn door after the horse 
is stolen
don’t swap horses in midstream
every horse thinks its own pack heaviest
for want of a nail the shoe was lost, for 
want of a shoe the horse was lost, and 
for want of a horse the rider was lost
give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it to 
death
a good horse cannot be of a bad color
the gray mare is the better horse
a horse can’t pull while kicking
horses for courses
if two ride on a horse, one must ride 
behind
if wishes were horses, beggars would ride
it’s a good horse that never stumbles See a 
stumble may prevent a fall
the man who is born in a stable is not a 
horse
a man without a religion is a horse with-
out a bridle
never look a gift horse in the mouth
a nod’s as good as a wink to a blind horse
a short horse is soon curried
there’s nothing so good for the inside of a 
man as the outside of a horse
three things are not to be trusted: a cow’s 
horn, a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s hoof
while the grass grows, the horse starves 
See while the grass grows, the steed 
starves
Index by Key Word
373
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd373   373 1/29/07   5:24:10 PM
the willing horse carries the load
you can lead a horse to water, but you 
can’t make him drink
zeal without knowledge is a runaway 
horse
horseback  set a beggar on horseback, 
and he’ll ride to the devil
hospitality  food without hospitality is 
medicine
host  one courageous thought will put 
to fl ight a host of troubles
hostage  he that has a wife and children 
has given hostages to fortune
hot  hot love is soon cold
a little pot is soon hot
strike while the iron is hot
hound  you can’t run with the hare and 
hunt with the hounds
hour  better three hours too soon than a 
minute too late See it’s better to be an 
hour too early than a minute too late
the darkest hour is just before dawn
a fool can ask more questions in an hour 
than a wise man can answer in seven 
years See fools ask questions that wise 
men cannot answer
an hour in the morning is worth two in 
the evening
it’s better to be an hour too early than a 
minute too late
lose an hour in the morning, chase it all 
day
one hour’s sleep before midnight is worth 
two after
six hours’ sleep for a man, seven for a 
woman, and eight for a fool
house  the back door robs the house See 
a postern door makes a thief
better one house spoiled than two
burn not your house to scare away the 
mice
education doesn’t come by bumping your 
head against the school house
fools build houses and wise men live in 
them
a house divided against itself cannot stand
the house shows the owner
a house without books is like a room 
without windows
it’s a sad house where the hen crows 
louder than the cock
it takes a heap of living to make a house 
a home
learning is better than house or land
men make houses, women make homes
never speak of rope in the house of a man 
who has been hanged
people who live in glass houses shouldn’t 
throw stones
when house and land are gone and spent, 
then learning is most excellent
who repairs not his gutters repairs his 
whole house
how  it’s not what you say, but how you 
say it
human  hope springs eternal in the 
human breast
to err is human, to forgive divine
humanum  humanum est errare See to err 
is human, to forgive divine
humble  humble hearts have humble 
desires
hundred  a bird in the hand is worth a 
hundred fl ying See a bird in the hand is 
worth two in the bush
the buyer has need of a hundred eyes, the 
seller of but one See the buyer needs a 
thousand eyes, the seller wants but one
the fi rst hundred years are the hardest
it’ll all be the same in a hundred years
victory has a hundred fathers and defeat is 
an orphan See success has many fathers, 
while failure is an orphan
hunger  hunger drives the wolf out of 
the wood
hunger is the best sauce
Index by Key Word
374
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd374   374 1/29/07   5:24:10 PM
hungry  a hungry man is an angry man
a hungry stomach has no ears
hunt  go hunting where the ducks are
you can’t run with the hare and hunt with 
the hounds
hurry  always in a hurry, always behind
hurry no man’s cattle
hurt  don’t cry before you’re hurt
sticks and stones may break my bones, but 
words will never hurt me
the truth hurts
what you don’t know can’t hurt you
work never hurt anybody
husband  a deaf husband and a blind 
wife are always a happy couple
a good husband makes a good wife
the husband is always the last to know
I  I today, you tomorrow See today you, 
tomorrow me
ice  the rich man has his ice in the sum-
mer and the poor man gets his in the 
winter
trust not one night’s ice
idea  all words are pegs to hang ideas 
on
idle  as good be an addled egg as an 
idle bird
the devil fi nds work for idle hands to do
an idle brain is the devil’s workshop
idle people have the least leisure
an idle youth, a needy age
it’s idle to swallow the cow and choke 
on the tail
time hangs heavy on idle hands
idleness  idleness is the root of all evil
if  if and an spoils many a good charter
if ifs and ans were pots and pans, there’d 
be no work for tinkers
ignorance  admiration is the daughter 
of ignorance
ignorance is a voluntary misfortune
ignorance is bliss
ignorance of the law is no excuse
prejudice is the child of ignorance
ill  he that has an ill name is half hanged 
See give a dog a bad name and hang him
he that lives in hope dances to an ill tune
an ill agreement is better than a good 
judgment
an ill beginning makes an ill ending
an ill bird lays an ill egg
ill doers are ill dreaders See evil doers are 
evil dreaders
ill-gotten goods never thrive
an ill master makes an ill servant See like 
master, like man
ill news comes apace See bad news travels 
fast
ill weeds grow apace
it’s an ill bird that fouls its own nest
it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any 
good
it’s ill jesting with edged tools
it’s ill sitting at Rome and striving with 
the Pope
it’s ill speaking between a full man and 
a fasting
it’s ill striving against the stream See strive 
not against the stream
it’s ill waiting for dead men’s shoes
never speak ill of the dead
imitation  imitation is the sincerest 
form of fl attery
imp  talk about the devil and his imps 
will appear See talk of the devil and he’s 
sure to appear
important  war is too important to be 
left to the generals
impossible  the diffi cult is done at once, 
the impossible takes a little longer
nothing is impossible to a willing heart
impression  fi rst impressions are the 
most lasting
improve  anger improves nothing but 
the arch of a cat’s back
in  garbage in, garbage out
Index by Key Word
375
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd375   375 1/29/07   5:24:10 PM
in for a penny, in for a pound
when the wine is in, the wit is out
inch  give a man an inch and he’ll take 
a mile
life is hard by the yard, but by the inch 
life’s a cinch
incline  as the twig is bent, so is the tree 
inclined
incompetence  every employee tends 
to rise to his level of incompetence
inconstancy  there’s nothing constant 
but inconstancy
inconvenience  poverty is no disgrace, 
but it’s a great inconvenience
indeed  a friend in need is a friend 
indeed
index  the face is the index of the mind 
See the eyes are the mirrors of the 
soul
Indian  too many chiefs and not enough 
Indians
indispensable  nobody is indispensable
industry  all things are easy to industry, 
all things diffi cult to sloth
necessity sharpens industry
infallible  nobody is infallible
infi nite  genius is an infi nite capacity for 
taking pains
infi nitum  big fl eas have little fl eas 
upon their backs to bite ’em, and 
little fl eas have lesser fl eas, and so ad 
infi nitum
infi rmity  dreams retain the infi rmities 
of our character
inherit  the meek shall inherit the earth
inheritance  beauty is no inheritance
injure  the rotten apple injures its 
neighbor See the rotten apple spoils 
the barrel
injury  neglect will kill an injury sooner 
than revenge
innocent  a man is innocent until proven 
guilty
inside  there’s nothing so good for the 
inside of a man as the outside of a 
horse
inspiration  genius is one percent inspi-
ration and ninety-nine percent per-
spiration
intelligence  never let your education 
interfere with your intelligence
nobody ever went broke underestimat-
ing the intelligence of the American 
people
intention  the road to hell is paved with 
good intentions
interest  interest will not lie
self-interest is the rule, self-sacrifi ce the 
exception
worry is interest paid on trouble before 
it falls due
interfere  never let your education 
interfere with your intelligence
introduction  beauty is a good letter of 
introduction
invent  if God did not exist, it would be 
necessary to invent him
invention  necessity is the mother of 
invention
iron  iron not used soon rusts See the 
used key is always bright
strike while the iron is hot
island  no man is an island
Jack, jack  all work and no play makes 
Jack a dull boy
every Jack has his Jill
a good Jack makes a good Jill
a jack of all trades is master of none
Jack’s as good as his master
jackass  a jackass can kick a barn door 
down, but it takes a carpenter to build 
one
jam  jam tomorrow and jam yesterday, 
but never jam today
jest  it’s ill jesting with edged tools
many a true word is spoken in jest
Index by Key Word
376
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd376   376 1/29/07   5:24:10 PM
jester  jesters do oft prove prophets
jewel  fair play’s a jewel
Jill  every Jack has his Jill
a good Jack makes a good Jill
jingle  when a man’s single, his pockets 
will jingle
job  if a job’s worth doing, it’s worth 
doing well See if a thing’s worth doing, 
it’s worth doing well
never send a boy to do a man’s job
join  if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em
joke  a rich man’s joke is always funny
journey  a journey of a thousand miles 
begins with one step
Jove  Jove but laughs at lover’s perjury
joy  the joy of the heart makes the face 
fair See a merry heart makes a cheerful 
countenance
no joy without annoy
one for sorrow, two for joy, three for a 
girl, and four for a boy See one for sor-
row; two for mirth; three for a wed-
ding; four for a birth
a thing of beauty is a joy forever
judge  don’t judge a book by its cover
don’t judge a man until you have walked a 
mile in his boots
judge not according to appearances
judge not, that ye be not judged
nobody should be judge in his own cause
judgment  an ill agreement is better 
than a good judgment
jump  don’t jump from the frying pan 
into the fi re
June  a dripping June sets all in tune
just  be just before you’re generous
justice  justice is blind
justify  the end justifi es the means
keep  death keeps no calendar
fi nding is keeping
great boats may venture more, but little 
boats should keep near shore See little 
boats should stay close to shore
great trees keep down little ones
hope keeps the heart from breaking See if 
it were not for hope, the heart would 
break
keep a thing seven years and you’ll fi nd 
a use for it
keep no more cats than will catch mice
keep your eyes wide open before mar-
riage, half shut afterward
keep your mouth shut and your eyes 
open
keep your shop and your shop will keep 
you
a man is known by the company he keeps
one sword keeps another in its scabbard
put your trust in God, and keep your 
powder dry
a secret is either too good to keep or too 
bad not to tell
truth keeps to the bottom of her well See 
truth lies at the bottom of a well
why keep a dog and bark yourself?
you can’t keep the birds from fl ying over 
your head, but you can keep them from 
building a nest in your hair
keeper  fi nders keepers, losers weepers
kernel  he that would eat the kernel 
must crack the nut See he that would 
eat the fruit must climb the tree
kettle  the pot calls the kettle black
key  a golden key can open any door
sloth is the key to poverty See sloth is the 
mother of poverty
the used key is always bright
kick  don’t overload gratitude; if you 
do, she’ll kick
a horse can’t pull while kicking
a jackass can kick a barn door down, but it 
takes a carpenter to build one
kill  care killed the cat
curiosity killed the cat
don’t kill the goose that lays the golden 
eggs
Index by Key Word
377
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd377   377 1/29/07   5:24:10 PM
gluttony kills more than the sword
if you would be happy for a week take 
a wife; if you would be happy for a 
month kill a pig; but if you would be 
happy all your life plant a garden
it’s not work that kills, but worry
it’s the pace that kills
killing no murder
neglect will kill an injury sooner than 
revenge
there are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream
kind (adj.)  be kind to your friends; if 
it weren’t for them, you would be a 
total stranger
kind hearts are more than coronets
kind (n.)  better a good cow than a cow 
of a good kind
it takes all kinds of people to make a 
world
king  a cat can look at a king
in the country of the blind, the one-eyed 
man is king
the king can do no wrong
kings have long arms
laws go as kings like
punctuality is the politeness of kings
kingdom  content is more than a king-
dom
for want of a nail the kingdom was lost See 
for want of a nail the shoe was lost, for 
want of a shoe the horse was lost, and 
for want of a horse the rider was lost
kirtle  near is my kirtle, but nearer is my 
smock See near is my shirt, but nearer 
is my skin
kiss  kissing goes by favor
many kiss the hand they wish to see cut 
off
kitchen  a fat kitchen makes a lean will
if you can’t stand the heat, get out of the 
kitchen
kitten  wanton kittens make sober cats
knapsack  every soldier has the baton of 
a fi eld-marshal in his knapsack
knee  it’s better to die on your feet than 
live on your knees
knife  fi ngers were made before knives 
and forks See fi ngers were made before 
forks
knock  a bribe will enter without 
knocking
ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye 
shall fi nd; knock, and it shall be opened 
unto you
opportunity knocks but once
opportunity never knocks for persons not 
worth a rap
know  better the devil you know than 
the devil you don’t know
by learning to obey, you will know how 
to command See he that cannot obey 
cannot command
come live with me and you’ll know me
the good seaman is known in bad weather
the husband is always the last to know
it’s a wise child that knows its own father
it’s not what you know, but who you 
know
it takes one to know one
know thyself
a man is known by the company he keeps
necessity knows no law
a new broom sweeps clean, but an old 
broom knows all the corners See a new 
broom sweeps clean
one half of the world doesn’t know how 
the other half lives
pay what you owe and you’ll know what 
you own
tell not all you know, nor do all you can
thinking is very far from knowing
those who know don’t speak; those who 
speak don’t know
Index by Key Word
378
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd378   378 1/29/07   5:24:10 PM
to know all is to forgive all
the tree is known by its fruit
the wearer best knows where the shoe 
pinches
what you don’t know can’t hurt you
who knows most, speaks least
years know more than books
you never know a man until you live 
with him
you never know what you can do until 
you try
young folks think old folks to be fools, but 
old folks know young folks to be fools
you should know a man seven years 
before you stir his fi re
knowledge  experience is the mother 
of knowledge See experience is the 
mother of wisdom
knowledge and timber shouldn’t be much 
used until they are seasoned
knowledge and wisdom are far from 
being one
knowledge is power
a little knowledge is a dangerous thing
zeal without knowledge is a runaway horse
known  See know
laborat  qui non laborat non manducet See 
he who does not work, neither should 
he eat
laborer  the laborer is worthy of his hire
lace  a lie can go around the world and 
back again while the truth is lacing up 
its boots
ladder  crosses are ladders that lead to 
heaven
he who would climb the ladder must 
begin at the bottom
lady  faint heart never won fair lady
far-fetched and dear-bought is good for 
ladies
the opera ain’t over till the fat lady sings
laid  See lay
laird  new lairds make new laws See new 
lords, new laws
lamb  God tempers the wind to the 
shorn lamb
March comes in like a lion and goes out 
like a lamb
one might as well be hanged for a sheep 
as for a lamb
land  every land has its own law
in the land of the blind, the one-eyed are 
kings See in the country of the blind, 
the one-eyed man is king
learning is better than house or land
little drops of water, little grains of sand, 
make a mighty ocean and a pleasant land
talk is cheap, but it takes money to buy 
land See talk is cheap
when house and land are gone and spent, 
then learning is most excellent
who has land has war
you buy land, you buy stones; you buy 
meat, you buy bones
lane  it’s a long lane that has no turning 
See it’s a long road that has no turning
large  honesty is the best policy, though 
it may not pay the largest dividends See 
honesty is the best policy
the larger the body, the bigger the heart
lark  if the sky falls, we shall catch larks
last (adj.)  he who laughs last, laughs 
longest
the husband is always the last to know
it’s the last straw that breaks the camel’s 
back
last but not least
the last drop makes the cup run over
live every day as though it were your last
nice guys fi nish last
patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel
a pitcher that goes to the well too often is 
broken at last See the pitcher will go to 
the well once too often
Index by Key Word
379
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd379   379 1/29/07   5:24:11 PM
there are no birds in last year’s nest
last (n.)  let the cobbler stick to his last
last (v.)  fi rst impressions are the most 
lasting
grace will last, beauty will blast
hoist up the sail while the gale does last 
See hoist your sail when the wind is 
fair
long foretold, long last; short notice, 
soon past
man’s work lasts till set of sun; woman’s 
work is never done See a woman’s work 
is never done
a wonder lasts but nine days
late  better late than never
the early man never borrows from the 
late man
it’s better to be an hour too early than a 
minute too late
it’s never too late to learn
it’s never too late to mend
it’s too late to shut the stable door after 
the horse has bolted See don’t shut the 
barn door after the horse is stolen
late children, early orphans
shoot fi rst, ask questions later See shoot 
fi rst and ask questions afterward
laugh  he who laughs last, laughs lon-
gest
it’s better to laugh than to cry
Jove but laughs at lover’s perjury
laugh and grow fat
laugh and the world laughs with you, 
weep and you weep alone
laugh before breakfast, cry before sunset 
See sing before breakfast, cry before 
night
let them laugh that win
love laughs at locksmiths
laughter  laughter is the best medicine
law  agree, for the law is costly
every land has its own law
hard cases make bad law
ignorance of the law is no excuse
laws go as kings like
necessity knows no law
new lords, new laws
nobody is above the law
one law for the rich and another for the 
poor
possession is nine points of the law
self-preservation is the fi rst law of nature
a wise lawyer never goes to law himself
lawbreaker  lawmakers should not be 
lawbreakers
lawmaker  lawmakers should not be 
lawbreakers
lawyer  the devil makes his Christmas pies 
of lawyers’ tongues and clerks’ fi ngers
a man who is his own lawyer has a fool 
for his client
a wise lawyer never goes to law himself
lay  all lay loads on the willing horse See 
the willing horse carries the load
the best-laid schemes of mice and men 
gang aft a-gley
don’t kill the goose that lays the golden 
eggs
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, 
bad luck you’ll have all the day
lead  all roads lead to Rome
crosses are ladders that lead to heaven
if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch
old maids lead apes in hell
one lie leads to another
people are more easily led than driven
you can lead a horse to water, but you 
can’t make him drink
leader  a good leader is also a good 
follower
leaf  deeds are fruits, words are but 
leaves
leak  little leaks sink the ship
lean  a fat kitchen makes a lean will
Index by Key Word
380
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd380   380 1/29/07   5:24:11 PM
leap  if one sheep leaps over the ditch, 
all the rest will follow
look before you leap
learn  by learning to obey, you will 
know how to command See he that can-
not obey cannot command
don’t go near the water until you learn 
how to swim
experience keeps a dear school, but fools 
will learn in no other See experience 
keeps a dear school
he that would learn to pray, let him go 
to sea
in politics a man must learn to rise above 
principle
it’s never too late to learn
learn from the mistakes of others
learning is better than house or land
a little learning is a dangerous thing See a 
little knowledge is a dangerous thing
live and learn
nobody is born learned; bishops are made 
of men
an old dog will learn no tricks See you 
can’t teach an old dog new tricks
there’s no royal road to learning
wear your learning like your watch, in a 
private pocket
we must learn to walk before we can run
when house and land are gone and spent, 
then learning is most excellent
least  idle people have the least leisure
last but not least
least said, soonest mended
that government is best which governs 
least
who knows most, speaks least
leave  the devil always leaves a stink 
behind him
leave no stone unturned
leave off while the play is good See quit 
while you are ahead
leave well enough alone
war is too important to be left to the 
generals
when in doubt, leave it out See when in 
doubt, do nothing
led  See lead
left  See leave
leg  everybody stretches his legs accord-
ing to the length of his coverlet
there goes more to marriage than four 
bare legs in a bed
use legs and have legs
legem  necessitas non habet legem See 
necessity knows no law
leisure  the busiest men have the most 
leisure
idle people have the least leisure
marry in haste, repent at leisure
there’s luck in leisure
lend  distance lends enchantment to the 
view
fear lends wings
lend your money and lose your friend
lender  neither a borrower nor a lender 
be
length  everybody stretches his legs 
according to the length of his coverlet
length begets loathing
lengthen  as the day lengthens, so the 
cold strengthens
lente  festina lente See make haste slowly
leopard  the leopard can’t change its spots
less  less is more
more haste, less speed
the more said, the less done
of two evils choose the less See choose the 
lesser of two evils
patience is a virtue which few possess—
some have a little, others have less See 
patience is a virtue
lesser  big fl eas have little fl eas upon 
their backs to bite ’em, and little fl eas 
have lesser fl eas, and so ad infi nitum
choose the lesser of two evils
Index by Key Word
381
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd381   381 1/29/07   5:24:11 PM
let  he who has a tiger by the tail dare 
not let go See he who rides a tiger is 
afraid to dismount
let bygones be bygones
let sleeping dogs lie
let well alone See leave well enough alone
live and let live
never let the sun go down on your anger
never let your education interfere with 
your intelligence
spare at the spigot, and let out the 
bunghole
letter  beauty is a good letter of intro-
duction
a good face is a letter of recommendation
level  every employee tends to rise to 
his level of incompetence
water seeks its own level
leveler  death is the great leveler
liar  a liar is not believed when he tells 
the truth
a liar is worse than a thief
a liar should have a good memory
show me a liar and I will show you a 
thief
libel  the greater the truth, the greater 
the libel
liberty  liberty is not licence
the price of liberty is eternal vigilance
lick  if you can’t lick ’em, join ’em See if 
you can’t beat ’em, join ’em
lie (n.)  ask me no questions and I’ll tell 
you no lies
half the truth is often a whole lie
a lie can go around the world and back again 
while the truth is lacing up its boots
one lie leads to another
there are lies, damned lies, and statistics
lie (v.)  as a tree falls, so shall it lie
as you make your bed, so you must lie 
in it
if you lie down with dogs, you’ll get up 
with fl eas
interest will not lie
let sleeping dogs lie
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lie, 
you’ll want a pin before you die See 
see a pin and pick it up, all the day 
you’ll have good luck; see a pin and let 
it lay, bad luck you’ll have all the day
a traveler may lie with authority
truth lies at the bottom of a well
uneasy lies the head that wears a crown
life  art is long and life is short
the best things in life are free
bread is the staff of life
a cat has nine lives
give me a child for the fi rst seven years 
and he is mine for life
if you would be happy for a week take 
a wife; if you would be happy for a 
month kill a pig; but if you would be 
happy all your life plant a garden
into every life a little rain must fall
life begins at forty
life is hard by the yard, but by the inch 
life’s a cinch
life is just a bowl of cherries
life is no bed of roses
life isn’t all beer and skittles
life is short and sweet
life is short and time is swift
life is too short
life is what you make it
life’s a bitch, and then you die
medicine can prolong life, but death will 
seize the doctor, too
a son is a son till he gets him a wife, a 
daughter’s a daughter all of her life
variety is the spice of life
while there’s life there’s hope
lifeblood  gossip is the lifeblood of 
society
lifetime  give a man a fi sh, and you feed 
him for a day; show him how to fi sh, 
and you feed him for a lifetime
Index by Key Word
382
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd382   382 1/29/07   5:24:11 PM
lift  a rising tide lifts all boats
light (adj.)  a heavy purse makes a light 
heart
light come, light go See easy come, easy go
light gains make heavy purses
a light purse makes a heavy heart
many hands make light work
small things affect light minds See little 
things please little minds
light (n.)  all arts are brothers, each is a 
light to the other
don’t hide your light under a bushel
light (v.)  it’s better to light one candle 
than curse the darkness
lightly  in the spring a young man’s 
fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love
lightning  lightning never strikes twice 
in the same place
like (adj.)  like attracts like
like breeds like
like cures like
like father, like son
like master, like man
like mother, like daughter
like people, like priest
like (v.)  if you don’t like it, you can 
lump it
if you don’t like the heat, get out of the 
kitchen See if you can’t stand the heat, 
get out of the kitchen
limit  the sky’s the limit
line  every cloud has a silver lining
linen  don’t wash your dirty linen in 
public
never choose your women or linen by 
candlelight
link  a chain is no stronger than its 
weakest link
linstock  the cobbler to his last and the 
gunner to his linstock See let the cob-
bler stick to his last
lion  better be the head of a dog than the 
tail of a lion
every dog is a lion at home See every cock 
will crow upon his own dunghill
a goose quill is more dangerous than a 
lion’s claw
the lion is not so fi erce as he is painted
a live dog is better than a dead lion
a man is a lion in his own cause
march comes in like a lion, and goes out 
like a lamb
a mouse may help a lion
lip  loose lips sink ships
there’s many a slip between cup and lip
liquor  talk is cheap, but it takes money 
to buy liquor See talk is cheap
listener  listeners never hear any good 
of themselves
little  better a big fi sh in a little pond 
than a little fi sh in a big pond
better a little fi re to warm us than a big 
one to burn us
big fi sh eat little fi sh
big fl eas have little fl eas upon their backs 
to bite ’em, and little fl eas have lesser 
fl eas, and so ad infi nitum
birds in their little nests agree
everybody’s queer but you and me, and 
even you are a little queer
every little helps
a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of 
little minds
great oaks from little acorns grow
great trees keep down little ones
into every life a little rain must fall
it’s better to light one little candle than 
curse the darkness See it’s better to 
light one candle than curse the dark-
ness
life is too short to be little See life is too 
short
a little absence does much good
little and often fi lls the purse
little birds that can sing and won’t sing 
must be made to sing
Index by Key Word
383
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd383   383 1/29/07   5:24:11 PM
little boats should stay close to shore
little drops of water, little grains of sand, 
make a mighty ocean and a pleasant 
land
little fi sh are sweet
a little knowledge is a dangerous thing
little leaks sink the ship
a little of what you fancy does you good
little pitchers have big ears
a little pot is soon hot
little strokes fell great oaks
little thieves are hanged, but great ones 
escape
little things please little minds
love me little, love me long
many a little makes a mickle
much cry and little wool
much smoke, little fi re
paper bleeds little
patience is a virtue which few possess—
some have a little, others have less See 
patience is a virtue
there’s no little enemy
live (adj.)  a live dog is better than a 
dead lion
live (v.)  be happy while you’re living, 
for you’re a long time dead
brave men lived before Agamemnon
can’t live with ’em, can’t live without ’em
come live with me and you’ll know me
eat to live, do not live to eat
fools build houses and wise men live in 
them
the good that men do lives after them
he lives long who lives well
he that lives in hope dances to an ill tune
he that lives on hope will die fasting
he who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day
he who lives by the sword dies by the 
sword
if you want to live and thrive, let the spi-
der run alive
it’s better to die on your feet than live on 
your knees
it’s hard to live in Rome and strive against 
the Pope See it’s ill sitting at Rome and 
striving with the Pope
it takes a heap of living to make a house 
a home
live and learn
live and let live 
live every day as though it were your last
a living dog is better than a dead lion See a 
live dog is better than a dead lion
man does not live by bread alone
one half of the world doesn’t know how 
the other half lives
people who live in glass houses shouldn’t 
throw stones
a reed before the wind lives on, while 
mighty oaks do fall
saturday’s child works hard for its living
they that live longest see most
threatened men live long
you must take two bears to live with 
you—bear and forbear See bear and 
forbear
you never know a man until you live 
with him
load  the willing horse carries the load
loaf  give a loaf and beg a slice
half a loaf is better than no bread
a slice off a cut loaf isn’t missed
loathe  length begets loathing
location  location, location, location
locksmith  love laughs at locksmiths
lonely  one seldom meets a lonely lie See 
one lie leads to another
long  art is long and life is short
be happy while you’re living, for you’re a 
long time dead
be not idle and you shall not be longing 
See an idle youth, a needy age
be the day weary or be the day long, at last 
it ringeth to evensong
Index by Key Word
384
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd384   384 1/29/07   5:24:11 PM
a creaking door hangs longest
the day is short and the work is long
the diffi cult is done at once, the impos-
sible takes a little longer
happy’s the wooing that’s not long a-
doing
he lives long who lives well
he that waits for dead men’s shoes may go 
a long time barefoot See it’s ill waiting 
for dead men’s shoes 
he who laughs last, laughs longest
he who sups with the devil should have a 
long spoon
it’s a long road that has no turning
kings have long arms
the longest day must have an end
the longest journey begins with a single 
step See a journey of a thousand miles 
begins with one step
the longest way around is the shortest 
way home
long foretold, long last; short notice, 
soon past
love me little, love me long
never is a long time
old sins cast long shadows
short reckonings make long friends
short visits make long friends
a stern chase is a long chase
they that live longest see most
threatened men live long
longa  ars longa, vita brevis See art is long 
and life is short
look  always look on the bright side
the art of being a parent consists of sleep-
ing when the baby isn’t looking
a cat can look at a king
the devil looks after his own
an honest look covereth many faults
if it looks like a duck, walks like a duck, 
and quacks like a duck, it’s a duck
look out for number one See take care of 
number one
look after the pennies and the dollars will 
look after themselves See take care of 
the pennies and the dollars will take 
care of themselves
look before you leap
a man is as old as he feels, and a woman as 
old as she looks
never look a gift horse in the mouth
opportunities look for you when you are 
worth fi nding
when all you have is a hammer, everything 
looks like a nail
looker  lookers-on see most of the 
game 
loose  loose lips sink ships
lord  everybody loves a lord
the Lord gives and the Lord takes away
the Lord moves in mysterious ways See 
God moves in mysterious ways
new lords, new laws
lordship  lordships change manners See 
honors change manners
lose  a bleating sheep loses a bite
business neglected is business lost
catch not at shadows and lose the sub-
stance
the cow knows not the value of her tail till 
she has lost it
for want of a nail the shoe was lost, for 
want of a shoe the horse was lost, and 
for want of a horse the rider was lost
a good name is sooner lost than won
heads I win, tails you lose
he who hesitates is lost
it’s better to lose the battle and win the 
war
it’s not whether you win or lose, but how 
you play the game
lend your money and lose your friend
lose an hour in the morning, chase it all 
day
the sun loses nothing by shining into a 
puddle
Index by Key Word
385
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd385   385 1/29/07   5:24:12 PM
a tale never loses in the telling
there’s nothing lost by civility 
time lost cannot be recalled
’tis better to have loved and lost, than 
never to have loved at all
what you lose on the swings you gain on 
the roundabouts
you can’t lose what you never had
you must lose a fl y to catch a trout See 
throw out a sprat to catch a mackerel
you snooze, you lose
you win some, you lose some
loser  fi nders keepers, losers weepers
the winners laugh, the losers weep See let 
them laugh that win
loss  one man’s loss is another man’s 
gain
there’s no great loss without some gain
lost  See lose
lot  one bad apple spoils the lot See the 
rotten apple spoils the barrel
lottery  marriage is a lottery
loud  actions speak louder than words
the more you stir a stink, the louder it 
smells See the more you stir it, the 
worse it stinks 
louse  sue a beggar and catch a louse
love  all’s fair in love and war
better a dinner of herbs where love is than 
a stalled ox where hate is
the course of true love never did run 
smooth
everybody loves a lord
faults are thick where love is thin
Friday’s child is loving and giving
God takes soonest those he loves best
hot love is soon cold
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love
it’s best to be off with the old love before 
you are on with the new
love and a cough cannot be hid
love begets love
love conquers all
love is blind; friendship closes its eyes
love is free 
love laughs at locksmiths
love makes the world go round
love me little, love me long
love me, love my dog
the love of money is the root of all evil
love will fi nd a way
love your enemy, but don’t put a gun in 
his hand
love your neighbor as yourself
lucky at cards, unlucky in love
misery loves company
money loves company See money begets 
money
one cannot love and be wise
pity is akin to love
praise the child, and you make love to 
the mother
the quarrel of lovers is the renewal of 
love
’tis better to have loved and lost, than 
never to have loved at all
when poverty comes in at the door, love 
fl ies out of the window
whom the gods love die young
lover  Jove but laughs at lover’s perjury
the quarrel of lovers is the renewal of 
love
luck  better luck next time
the devil’s children have the devil’s luck
diligence is the mother of good luck
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, 
bad luck you’ll have all the day
there’s luck in leisure
there’s luck in odd numbers
lucky  it’s better to be born lucky than 
rich
lucky at cards, unlucky in love
Index by Key Word
386
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd386   386 1/29/07   5:24:12 PM
third time lucky See the third time is the 
charm
lump  if you don’t like it, you can lump 
it
lunch  there’s no such thing as a free 
lunch
mackerel  throw out a sprat to catch a 
mackerel
mad  don’t get mad, get even
he that would hang his dog gives out fi rst 
that he is mad
whom the gods would destroy, they fi rst 
make mad
made  see make
maid  old maids lead apes in hell
Maine  as Maine goes, so goes the 
nation
majority  it’s better to be right than in 
the majority
make  as you make your bed, so you 
must lie in it
clothes don’t make the man
clothes make the man
the company makes the feast
conscience does make cowards of us all
the cowl does not make the monk
don’t make the same mistake twice
fi ngers were made before forks
fi rst catch your rabbit and then make your 
stew See fi rst catch your hare
from nothing, nothing is made See nothing 
comes of nothing
haste makes waste
he who is good at making excuses is sel-
dom good at anything else
if you don’t make mistakes you don’t 
make anything
it takes all kinds of people to make a 
world
it takes money to make money
it takes two to make a bargain
it takes two to make a quarrel
life is what you make it
little birds that can sing and won’t sing 
must be made to sing
love makes the world go round
make haste slowly
make hay while the sun shines
manners make the man
marriages are made in heaven
men make houses, women make homes
might makes right
money makes a man
money makes money See money begets 
money
money makes the mare go
money makes the world go round
neither take offense nor make offense See 
neither give nor take offense
nine tailors make a man
one lie makes many See one lie leads to 
another
one swallow does not make a summer
opportunity makes a thief
peace makes plenty
poets are born, not made
a postern door makes a thief
practice makes perfect
praise the child, and you make love to 
the mother
promises are like piecrust: easy made and 
easy broken See promises, like piecrust, 
are made to be broken
revolutions are not made with rose water
rules are made to be broken
short visits make long friends
success makes success as money makes 
money See success breeds success
the tailor makes the man
two and two and makes four
two wrongs don’t make a right
you can lead a horse to water, but you 
can’t make him drink
you can’t make an omelette without 
breaking eggs
Index by Key Word
387
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd387   387 1/29/07   5:24:12 PM
you can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s 
ear
you can’t make bricks without straw
male  the female of the species is dead-
lier than the male
mammon  you can’t serve God and 
mammon
man  all men are created equal
behind every great man there is a great 
woman
the best-laid schemes of mice and men 
gang aft a-gley
the best of men are but men at best
better be an old man’s darling than a 
young man’s slave
a blind man’s wife needs no paint
brave men lived before Agamemnon
the busiest men have the most leisure
call a man a thief and he will steal
call no man happy till he dies
the child is father of the man
clothes don’t make the man
clothes make the man
dead men don’t bite
dead men tell no tales
a dog is a man’s best friend
don’t hit a man when he’s down
don’t judge a man until you have walked a 
mile in his boots
do right and fear no man
a drowning man will catch at a straw
the early man never borrows from the 
late man
early to bed and early to rise, makes a man 
healthy, wealthy, and wise
every elm has its man
every man after his fashion
every man for himself and God for us 
all
every man for himself and the devil take 
the hindmost
every man has his price
every man is his own worst enemy
every man is the architect of his own 
fortune
every man must skin his own skunk
every man thinks his own geese swans
every man to his taste
every man to his trade
a fool may give a wise man counsel
fools ask questions that wise men cannot 
answer
give a man a fi sh, and you feed him for 
a day; show him how to fi sh, and you 
feed him for a lifetime
give a man an inch and he’ll take a mile
give a man enough rope and he’ll hang 
himself
God made the country and man made 
the town
good men are scarce
the good that men do lives after them
great men have great faults
haste makes waste, and waste makes 
want, and want makes strife between a 
good man and his wife See haste makes 
waste
a hungry man is an angry man
hurry no man’s cattle
in politics a man must learn to rise above 
principle
in the country of the blind, the one-eyed 
man is king
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love
it’s ill speaking between a full man and 
a fasting
it’s ill waiting for dead men’s shoes
like master, like man
a man can only die once
man does not live by bread alone
a man in debt is caught in a net
a man is a lion in his own cause
a man is as old as he feels, and a woman as 
old as she looks
a man is innocent until proven guilty
Index by Key Word
388
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd388   388 1/29/07   5:24:12 PM
a man is known by the company he keeps
man is the measure of all things
manners make the man
man proposes, God disposes
a man’s best reputation for the future is 
his record of the past
man’s extremity is God’s opportunity
a man’s got to do what a man’s got to do
a man’s home is his castle
a man’s word is as good as his bond
man’s work lasts till set of sun; woman’s 
work is never done See a woman’s work 
is never done
the man who is born in a stable is not a 
horse
a man who is his own lawyer has a fool 
for his client
a man without a religion is a horse with-
out a bridle
a man wrapped up in himself makes a very 
small bundle
meat and mass never hindered man
men are blind in their own cause
men are from Mars, women are from 
Venus
men make houses, women make homes
money makes a man
never send a boy to do a man’s job
never speak of rope in the house of a man 
who has been hanged
nine tailors make a man
nobody is born learned; bishops are made 
of men
no man can call again yesterday See yester-
day will not be called again
no man can serve two masters
no man is above the law, and no man is 
below it See nobody is above the law
no man is a hero to his valet
no man is an island
no man is necessary See nobody is indis-
pensable
no moon, no man
one man’s loss is another man’s gain
one man’s meat is another man’s poison
one man’s trash is another man’s treasure 
one volunteer is worth two pressed men
patience is a virtue, catch it if you can: 
seldom in a woman and never in a man 
See patience is a virtue
praise no man till he is dead
the rich man has his ice in the summer and 
the poor man gets his in the winter
a rich man’s joke is always funny
six hours’ sleep for a man, seven for a 
woman, and eight for a fool
so many men, so many opinions
the style is the man
the tailor makes the man
there’s a tide in the affairs of man
there’s nothing so good for the inside of a 
man as the outside of a horse
threatened men live long
time and tide wait for no man
war will cease when men refuse to fi ght
the way to a man’s heart is through his 
stomach
whatever man has done, man may do
when a dog bites a man, that is not news; but 
when a man bites a dog, that is news
when a man’s single, his pockets will 
jingle
a whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men
a willful man must have his way
a wise man changes his mind, but a fool 
never does 
a wise man is never less alone than when 
alone
wise men learn by other men’s mistakes, 
fools by their own See learn from the 
mistakes of others
you can’t be all things to all men
you can’t beat a man at his own game
you never know a man until you live 
with him
Index by Key Word
389
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd389   389 1/29/07   5:24:12 PM
a young man married is a young man 
marred
young men may die, but old men must 
die
you should know a man seven years 
before you stir his fi re
manducet  qui non laborat non manducet 
See he who does not work, neither 
should he eat
manner  evil communications corrupt 
good manners
honors change manners
manners make the man
other times, other manners
many  he who begins many things, fi n-
ishes but few
many a little makes a mickle
many are called, but few are chosen
many a true word is spoken in jest
many drops of water make an ocean See 
little drops of water, little grains of 
sand, make a mighty ocean and a pleas-
ant land
many go out for wool and come home 
shorn
many hands make light work
many kiss the hand they wish to see cut 
off
one funeral makes many
one lie makes many See one lie leads to 
another
so many countries, so many customs
so many men, so many opinions
there’s many a slip between cup and lip
too many chiefs and not enough Indians
too many cooks spoil the broth
two’s a couple, three’s a crowd, four’s too 
many, and fi ve’s not allowed See two’s 
company, three’s a crowd
mar  a young man married is a young 
man marred
march  an army marches on its stom-
ach
March  March comes in like a lion, and 
goes out like a lamb
March winds and April showers always 
bring May fl owers See April showers 
bring May fl owers
mare  the gray mare is the better horse
money makes the mare go
nothing so bold as a blind mare
market  buy in the cheapest market and 
sell in the dearest
send a fool to market and a fool he’ll 
return
marriage  dream of a funeral and you 
hear of a marriage
keep your eyes wide open before mar-
riage, half shut afterward
marriage is a lottery
marriages are made in heaven
there goes more to marriage than four 
bare legs in a bed
marry  honest men marry quickly, wise 
men not all
marry in haste, repent at leisure
marry in May, rue for aye
never marry for money, but marry where 
money is
a young man married is a young man 
marred
Mars  men are from Mars, women are 
from Venus
martyr  the blood of the martyrs is the 
seed of the church
mass  meat and mass never hindered man
master  the eye of a master does more 
work than both his hands
fi re is a good servant but a bad master
a jack of all trades is master of none
Jack’s as good as his master
like master, like man
no man can serve two masters
may  gather ye rosebuds while ye may
he that will not when he may, when he 
will he may have nay
Index by Key Word
390
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd390   390 1/29/07   5:24:12 PM
young men may die, but old men must 
die
May  April showers bring May fl owers
marry in May, rue for aye
May chickens come cheeping
ne’er cast a clout till May be out
a wet May brings plenty of hay
me  today you, tomorrow me
mean  hell is full of good meanings, 
but heaven is full of good works See 
the road to hell is paved with good 
intentions
silence means consent See silence gives 
consent
speak not of my debts unless you mean 
to pay them
means  the end justifi es the means
he who wills the end, wills the means
measure  man is the measure of all 
things
there’s measure in all things
meat  the closer to the bone, the sweeter 
the meat See the nearer the bone, the 
sweeter the fl esh
God never sends mouths but he sends 
meat
God sends meat, but the devil sends 
cooks
meat and mass never hindered man
one man’s meat is another man’s poison
you buy land, you buy stones; you buy 
meat, you buy bones
meddle  busy folks are always meddling
medicine  a dose of adversity is often as 
needful as a dose of medicine
food without hospitality is medicine
laughter is the best medicine
medicine can prolong life, but death will 
seize the doctor, too
meek  the meek shall inherit the earth
meet  be nice to people on your way 
up because you’ll meet them on your 
way down
don’t meet troubles halfway
East is East and West is West and never the 
twain shall meet
extremes meet
one seldom meets a lonely lie See one lie 
leads to another
when Greek meets Greek, then comes the 
tug of war
même  plus ça change, plus c’est la même 
chose See the more things change, the 
more they stay the same 
memory  a liar should have a good 
memory
men  See man
mend  it’s never too late to mend
least said, soonest mended
when things are at the worst they begin 
to mend
mention  never mention a rope in the 
house of a man who has been hanged 
See Never speak of rope in the house of 
a man who has been hanged
merry  eat, drink, and be merry, for 
tomorrow we die
it’s merry in hall when beards wag all
a merry heart makes a cheerful coun-
tenance
the more the merrier
merryman  the best doctors are Dr. 
Diet, Dr. Quiet, and Dr. Merryman
messenger  don’t shoot the messenger
mice  See mouse
mickle  many a little makes a mickle
middle  don’t change horses in the mid-
dle of the stream See don’t swap horses 
in midstream
don’t change the rules in the middle of 
the game
midge  the mother of mischief is no big-
ger than a midge’s wing
midnight  one hour’s sleep before mid-
night is worth two after
Index by Key Word
391
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd391   391 1/29/07   5:24:13 PM
midstream  don’t swap horses in mid-
stream
might  might makes right
mighty  a cock is mighty in his own 
backyard See every cock will crow 
upon his own dunghill
little drops of water, little grains of sand, 
make a mighty ocean and a pleasant 
land
the pen is mightier than the sword
a reed before the wind lives on, while 
mighty oaks do fall
mile  after dinner rest awhile, after sup-
per walk a mile
cheerful company shortens the miles See 
good company on the road is the short-
est cut
give a man an inch and he’ll take a mile
don’t judge a man until you have walked a 
mile in his boots
a journey of a thousand miles begins with 
one step
a miss is as good as a mile
milk  it’s no use crying over spilled 
milk
why buy a cow when milk is so cheap? See 
why buy the cow when you can get the 
milk for free?
mill  all is grist that comes to the mill
the mill cannot grind with the water that 
is past
the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceedingly small
much water goes by the mill that the 
miller know not of
mind  calamity is the touchstone of a 
brave mind
a contented mind is a continual feast
the face is the index of the mind See the 
eyes are the mirrors of the soul
a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of 
little minds
great minds think alike
he who has a mind to beat a dog will easily 
fi nd a stick See it’s easy to fi nd a stick 
to beat a dog 
if wind blows on you through a hole, say 
your prayers and mind your soul
little things please little minds
a mind is a terrible thing to waste
mind unemployed is mind unenjoyed
mind your own business
out of sight, out of mind
travel broadens the mind
a wise man changes his mind, but a fool 
never does
mine (n.)  genius without education is 
like silver in the mine
mine (pron.)  what’s yours is mine, and 
what’s mine is my own
minute  everybody has his fi fteen min-
utes of fame
it’s better to be an hour too early than a 
minute too late
there’s a sucker born every minute
miracle  the age of miracles is past
mirror  the best place for criticism is in 
front of your mirror
the eyes are the mirrors of the soul
mirth  one for sorrow; two for mirth; 
three for a wedding; four for a birth
mischief  the mother of mischief is no 
bigger than a midge’s wing
misery  misery loves company
misery makes strange bedfellows See 
adversity makes strange bedfellows 
misfortune  ignorance is a voluntary 
misfortune
misfortunes never come singly
miss  a miss is as good as a mile
a slice off a cut loaf isn’t missed
what you’ve never had you never miss
you never miss the water till the well 
runs dry
mistake  don’t make the same mistake 
twice
Index by Key Word
392
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd392   392 1/29/07   5:24:13 PM
if you don’t make mistakes you don’t 
make anything
learn from the mistakes of others
mix  never mix business with pleasure
oil and water do not mix
whiskey and gasoline don’t mix
moderation  moderation in all things
moeurs  autres temps, autres moeurs See 
other times, other manners
Mohammed  if the mountain will not 
come to Mohammed, Mohammed 
must go to the mountain
moment  seize the moment See seize 
the day
Monday  Monday’s child is fair of face
money  bad money drives out good
both poverty and prosperity come from 
spending money—prosperity from 
spending it wisely
don’t throw good money after bad
a fool and his money are soon parted
a good reputation is more valuable than 
money
it takes money to make money
lend your money and lose your friend
the love of money is the root of all evil
money begets money
money burns a hole in the pocket
money can’t buy happiness
money doesn’t grow on trees
money has no smell
money isn’t everything
money is power
money is round and rolls away
money is the root of all evil
money makes a man
money makes the mare go
money makes the world go round
money talks
never marry for money, but marry where 
money is
success makes success as money makes 
money See success breeds success
talk is cheap, but it takes money to buy 
land See talk is cheap
talk is cheap, but it takes money to buy 
liquor See talk is cheap
time is money
you pays your money and you takes your 
choice
monk  the cowl does not make the 
monk
monkey  the higher the monkey climbs 
the more he shows his tail
if you pay peanuts, you get monkeys
monkey see, monkey do
softly, softly, catchee monkey
month  if you would be happy for a week 
take a wife; if you would be happy for 
a month kill a pig; but if you would be 
happy all your life plant a garden
moon  no moon, no man
more  content is more than a kingdom
grasp no more than the hand will hold
half is more than the whole See the half is 
better than the whole
less is more
more haste, less speed
the more said, the less done
the more the merrier
the more things change, the more they 
stay the same
the more you get, the more you want
the more you stir it, the worse it stinks
much would have more
there are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream
there’s more than one way to skin a cat
years know more than books
morning  an hour in the morning is 
worth two in the evening
lose an hour in the morning, chase it all 
day
morning dreams come true
red sky at night, sailor’s delight; red sky in 
the morning, sailors take warning
Index by Key Word
393
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd393   393 1/29/07   5:24:13 PM
mortuis  de mortuis nil nisi bonum See 
never speak ill of the dead
moss  a rolling stone gathers no moss
most  they that live longest see most
who knows most, speaks least
mother  absence is the mother of disil-
lusion
diligence is the mother of good luck
experience is the mother of wisdom
he that would the daughter win, must 
with the mother fi rst begin
idleness is the mother of all the vices See 
idleness is the root of all evil
like mother, like daughter
a mother can take care of ten children, 
but sometimes ten children can’t take 
care of one mother
the mother of mischief is no bigger than a 
midge’s wing
necessity is the mother of invention
praise the child, and you make love to 
the mother
sloth is the mother of poverty
step on a crack, break your mother’s back
motion  the wheel of fortune is forever 
in motion
motor  what’s good for General Motors 
is good for America
mountain  faith will move mountains
if the mountain will not come to Moham-
med, Mohammed must go to the 
mountain
mouse  the best-laid schemes of mice 
and men gang aft a-gley
burn not your house to scare away the 
mice
a cat in gloves catches no mice
keep no more cats than will catch mice
a mouse may help a lion
the mouse that has but one hole is quickly 
taken
one for the mouse, one for the crow, one 
to rot, one to grow
when the cat’s away, the mice will play
mouth  God never sends mouths but he 
sends meat
keep your mouth shut and your eyes 
open
never look a gift horse in the mouth
out of the fullness of the heart the mouth 
speaks
out of the mouths of babes and sucklings 
come great truths
a shut mouth catches no fl ies
mouthful  the sheep that bleats loses a 
mouthful See a bleating sheep loses a 
bite
move  faith will move mountains
god moves in a mysterious way
three moves are as bad as a fi re
much  birth is much but breeding more
everybody to whom much is given, of him 
will much be required
much coin, much care
much cry and little wool
much smoke, little fi re
much water goes by the mill that the 
miller knows not of
much would have more
one enemy is too much
you can have too much of a good thing
muck  where there’s muck there’s brass
muckle  many a mickle makes a muckle 
See many a little makes a mickle
multitude  charity covers a multitude 
of sins
murder  killing no murder
murder will out
music  he that lives in hope dances 
without music See he that lives in hope 
dances to an ill tune
music hath charms to soothe the savage 
breast
must  needs must when the devil drives
what must be, must be See what will be, 
will be
Index by Key Word
394
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd394   394 1/29/07   5:24:13 PM
young men may die, but old men must die
mysterious  God moves in mysterious 
ways
nail  for want of a nail the shoe was 
lost, for want of a shoe the horse was 
lost, and for want of a horse the rider 
was lost
one nail drives out another
when all you have is a hammer, everything 
looks like a nail
name  give a dog a bad name and hang 
him
a good name is better than precious oint-
ment
a good name is sooner lost than won
no names, no pack-drill
a rose by any other name would smell 
as sweet
sticks and stones may break my bones, but 
names will never hurt me
what’s in a name?
nation  as Maine goes, so goes the 
nation
the English are a nation of shopkeepers
nature  nature abhors a vacuum
nature does nothing in vain
nature passes nurture
nature will have its course
nurture passes nature
self-preservation is the fi rst law of nature
you can drive out nature with a pitchfork 
but she keeps on coming back
nay  he that will not when he may, when 
he will he may have nay
near  the farthest way about is the near-
est way home See the longest way 
around is the shortest way home
great boats may venture more, but little 
boats should keep near shore See little 
boats should stay close to shore
the nearer the bone, the sweeter the fl esh
the nearer the church, the farther from 
God
near is my shirt, but nearer is my skin
necessary  if God did not exist, it would 
be necessary to invent him
no man is necessary See nobody is indis-
pensable
necessitas  necessitas non habet legem See 
necessity knows no law
necessity  make a virtue of necessity
necessity is the mother of invention
necessity knows no law
necessity sharpens industry
needs must when necessity drives See 
needs must when the devil drives
need  a blind man’s wife needs no paint
the buyer needs a thousand eyes, the 
seller wants but one
a friend in need is a friend indeed
a full cup needs a steady hand See full cup, 
steady hand
good wine needs no bush
a guilty conscience needs no accuser
need makes the old wife trot
needs must when the devil drives
with friends like that, who needs ene-
mies?
you need more than dancing shoes to be 
a dancer
needful  a dose of adversity is often as 
needful as a dose of medicine
needy  an idle youth, a needy age
neglect  business neglected is business 
lost
neglect will kill an injury sooner than 
revenge
neighbor  good fences make good 
neighbors
love your neighbor as yourself
the rotten apple injures its neighbor See 
the rotten apple spoils the barrel
Nero  Nero fiddled while Rome 
burned
nest  birds in their little nests agree
it’s an ill bird that fouls its own nest
Index by Key Word
395
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd395   395 1/29/07   5:24:13 PM
there are no birds in last year’s nest
you can’t keep the birds from fl ying over 
your head, but you can keep them from 
building a nest in your hair
net  all is fi sh that comes to the net
in vain the net is spread in the sight of 
the bird
a man in debt is caught in a net
never  better late than never
envy never dies
never do things by halves
never is a long time
never say die
never say never
never trouble trouble till trouble troubles 
you
never work with children or animals
nought is never in danger 
tomorrow never comes
true blue will never stain
what you’ve never had you never miss
wonders will never cease!
you can’t lose what you never had
youth and old age will never agree
new  always something new out of 
Africa
everything old is new again
it’s best to be off with the old love before 
you are on with the new 
a new broom sweeps clean
a new day, a new dollar See another day, 
another dollar
new lords, new laws
there’s nothing new under the sun
tomorrow is a new day See tomorrow is 
another day
trust not a new friend nor an old enemy
what’s new cannot be true
you can’t put new wine in old bottles
you can’t teach an old dog new tricks
news  bad news travels fast
go abroad and you’ll hear news of home
he comes too early who brings bad news
no news is good news
when a dog bites a man, that is not news; 
but when a man bites a dog, that is 
news
nice  be nice to people on your way 
up because you’ll meet them on your 
way down
nice guys fi nish last
night  all cats are black at night See all 
cats are gray in the dark
at night all cats are gray See all cats are 
gray in the dark
the longest night will have an end See the 
longest day must have an end
night brings counsel
red sky at night, sailor’s delight; red sky in 
the morning, sailors take warning
sing before breakfast, cry before night
trust not one night’s ice
nihil  ex nihilo nihil fi t See nothing comes 
of nothing
nihilo  ex nihilo nihil fi t See nothing 
comes of nothing
nil  de mortuis nil nisi bonum See never 
speak ill of the dead
nine  a cat has nine lives
nine tailors make a man
parsley seed goes nine times to the devil
possession is nine points of the law
a stitch in time saves nine
a wonder lasts but nine days
ninety-nine  genius is one percent inspi-
ration and ninety-nine percent perspi-
ration
nisi  de mortuis nil nisi bonum See never 
speak ill of the dead 
no  beauty is no inheritance
leave no stone unturned
no joy without annoy
no man can call again yesterday See yester-
day will not be called again
no moon, no man
no names, no pack-drill
Index by Key Word
396
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd396   396 1/29/07   5:24:13 PM
no news is good news
no pain, no gain
no penny, no paternoster
praise no man till he is dead
there’s no accounting for tastes
there’s no disputing about tastes
there’s no fool like an old fool
there’s no great loss without some gain
there’s no little enemy
there’s no peace for the wicked
there’s no place like home
there’s no pleasure without pain 
there’s no rest for the weary
there’s no rose without a thorn
there’s no royal road to learning
there’s no smoke without fi re
there’s no such thing as a free lunch
there’s no such thing as bad weather, only 
the wrong clothes
there’s no time like the present
nobody  everybody’s business is nobody’s 
business
it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any 
good
nobody forgets a good teacher
nobody is above the law
nobody is indispensable
nobody is infallible
nobody is perfect
those who please everybody please nobody 
See you can’t please everybody
you can’t beat somebody with nobody
nod  Homer sometimes nods
a nod’s as good as a wink to a blind horse
noise  an empty barrel makes the most 
noise See empty vessels make the most 
sound
non  non olet See money has no smell
none  a friend to all is a friend to none
half a loaf is better than none See half a loaf 
is better than no bread
a jack of all trades is master of none
none but the brave deserve the fair
one of these days is none of these days
there are none so blind as those who will 
not see
there are none so deaf as those who will 
not hear
too much of a good thing is worse than 
none at all See you can have too much 
of a good thing
two is company but three is none See 
two’s company, three’s a crowd
north  the north wind doth blow and we 
shall have snow
nose  don’t cut off your nose to spite 
your face
nothing  believe only half of what you 
see and nothing you hear
civility costs nothing
criticism is something you can avoid by 
saying nothing, doing nothing, and 
being nothing
gambling is getting nothing for something
nature does nothing in vain
nothing comes of nothing
nothing for nothing
nothing is certain but the unforeseen
nothing succeeds like success
nothing ventured, nothing gained
pay as you go and nothing you’ll owe
something is better than nothing
the sun loses nothing by shining into a 
puddle
there’s nothing lost by civility
there’s nothing new under the sun
we have nothing to fear but fear itself See the 
only thing we have to fear is fear itself
when in doubt, do nothing
you don’t get something for nothing
notice  long foretold, long last; short 
notice, soon past
nought  nought is never in danger
nourish  desires are nourished by delays
nowt  there’s nowt so queer as folk
number  take care of number one
Index by Key Word
397
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd397   397 1/29/07   5:24:14 PM
there’s luck in odd numbers
there’s safety in numbers
nurture  nature passes nurture
nurture passes nature
nut  the gods send nuts to those who 
have no teeth
he that would eat the kernel must crack 
the nut See he that would eat the fruit 
must climb the tree
oak  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; 
creep under the thorn, it can save you 
from harm
great oaks from little acorns grow
little strokes fell great oaks
a reed before the wind lives on, while 
mighty oaks do fall
obedience  the fi rst duty of a soldier is 
obedience
obey  he that cannot obey cannot com-
mand
obey orders, if you break owners
obvious  the obvious choice is usually a 
quick regret
ocean  little drops of water, little grains 
of sand, make a mighty ocean and a 
pleasant land
odd  there’s luck in odd numbers
odious  comparisons are odious
off  it’s best to be off with the old love 
before you are on with the new
offender  offenders never pardon
offense  the best defense is a good 
offense 
neither give nor take offense
often  little and often fi lls the purse
the pitcher will go to the well once too 
often
oil  oil and water do not mix
the squeaky wheel gets the oil See the 
squeaky wheel gets the grease
ointment  a good name is better than 
precious ointment
old  better be an old man’s darling than 
a young man’s slave
everything old is new again
it’s best to be off with the old love before 
you are on with the new
a man is as old as he feels, and a woman as 
old as she looks
need makes the old wife trot
never too old to learn See it’s never too 
late to learn
a new broom sweeps clean, but an old 
broom knows all the corners See a new 
broom sweeps clean
an old fox is not easily snared
old friends and old wine are best
old habits die hard
old maids lead apes in hell
an old poacher makes the best gamekeeper
old sins cast long shadows
old soldiers never die
spare when you’re young and spend when 
you’re old
there’s many a good tune played on an 
old fi ddle
there’s no fool like an old fool
trust not a new friend nor an old enemy
you can’t catch old birds with chaff
you can’t put an old head on young 
shoulders
you can’t put new wine in old bottles
you can’t shift an old tree without it dying
you can’t teach an old dog new tricks 
a young barber and an old physician
the young cock crows as he heard the 
old one
young folks think old folks to be fools, but 
old folks know young folks to be fools
young men forgive, old men never See 
youth and old age will never agree
young men may die, but old men must die
young saint, old devil
youth and old age will never agree
older  the older the wiser
Index by Key Word
398
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd398   398 1/29/07   5:24:14 PM
olet  non olet See money has no smell
omelette  you can’t make an omelette 
without breaking eggs
omission  there’s a sin of omission as 
well as of commission
omnia  amor vincit omnia See love con-
quers all
on  it’s best to be off with the old love 
before you are on with the new
once  Christmas comes but once a year
the diffi cult is done at once, the impos-
sible takes a little longer
fool me once, shame on you; fool me 
twice, shame on me
a man can only die once
once a priest, always a priest
once a thief, always a thief
once bitten, twice shy
once burned, twice shy
one cannot be in two places at once
opportunity knocks but once
the pitcher will go to the well once too 
often
what has happened once can happen again
you can only die once
you’re only young once
one  all arts are one, all branches on one 
tree See all arts are brothers, each is a 
light to the other
better one house spoiled than two
a bird never fl ew on one wing
the buyer needs a thousand eyes, the 
seller wants but one
the coward dies a thousand deaths, the 
brave but one See cowards die many 
times before their death
every dog is allowed one bite
every one after his fashion See every man 
after his fashion
from the sublime to the ridiculous is only 
one step
genius is one percent inspiration and 
ninety-nine percent perspiration
if one sheep leaps over the ditch, all the 
rest will follow
if two ride on a horse, one must ride 
behind
in the country of the blind, the one-eyed 
man is king
it’s six of one and half a dozen of the 
other 
it takes one to know one
it takes two to make a quarrel, but one 
can end it See it takes two to make a 
quarrel
a journey of a thousand miles begins with 
one step
knowledge and wisdom are far from 
being one
the mouse that has but one hole is quickly 
taken
one bad apple spoils the lot See the rotten 
apple spoils the barrel
one business begets another
one enemy is too much
one for sorrow; two for mirth; three for a 
wedding; four for a birth
one for the mouse, one for the crow, one 
to rot, one to grow
one funeral makes many
one good turn deserves another
one hand for yourself and one for the 
ship
one hand washes the other
one hour’s sleep before midnight is worth 
two after
one law for the rich and another for the 
poor
one lie leads to another
one man’s loss is another man’s gain
one man’s meat is another man’s poison
one man’s trash is another man’s treasure
one nail drives out another
one of these days is none of these days
one picture is worth ten thousand words
one step at a time
Index by Key Word
399
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd399   399 1/29/07   5:24:14 PM
one story is good till another is told
one swallow does not make a summer
one sword keeps another in its scabbard
one thief robs another
one volunteer is worth two pressed men
one wedding brings another
one year’s seeding makes seven years’ 
weeding
take care of number one
there’s more than one way to skin a cat
trust not one night’s ice
two can keep a secret if one is dead See 
three may keep a secret, if two of them 
are dead
two eyes see more than one See four eyes 
see more than two
two heads are better than one
when one door closes, another one opens
only  avoidance is the only remedy
the only thing we have to fear is fear 
itself
winning isn’t everything, it’s the only 
thing
you can only die once
you’re only young once
open  ask, and it shall be given you; 
seek, and ye shall fi nd; knock, and it 
shall be opened unto you
a door must be either shut or open
a golden key can open any door
keep your eyes wide open before mar-
riage, half shut afterward
keep your mouth shut and your eyes 
open
open confession is good for the soul See 
confession is good for the soul
an open door may tempt a saint
when one door closes, another one opens
opera  the opera ain’t over till the fat 
lady sings
opinion  he that complies against his 
will is of his own opinion still
so many men, so many opinions
opportunity  man’s extremity is God’s 
opportunity
opportunities look for you when you are 
worth fi nding
opportunity knocks but once
opportunity makes a thief
opportunity never knocks for persons not 
worth a rap
take opportunity by the forelock See take 
time by the forelock
opposite  opposites attract
optimist  the optimist’s cup is half full; 
the pessimist’s cup is half empty See 
the glass is either half empty or half 
full
order  obey orders, if you break own-
ers
orphan  late children, early orphans
success has many fathers, while failure is 
an orphan
other  do unto others as you would have 
them do unto you
the grass is always greener on the other 
side of the fence
it’s six of one and half a dozen of the 
other
learn from the mistakes of others
one half of the world doesn’t know how 
the other half lives
one hand washes the other
other times, other manners
a rose by any other name would smell 
as sweet
the shoe is on the other foot
there are other fi sh in the sea
ounce  an ounce of common sense is 
worth a pound of theory
an ounce of discretion is worth a pound 
of wit
an ounce of practice is worth a pound of 
precept
Index by Key Word
400
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd400   400 1/29/07   5:24:14 PM
an ounce of prevention is worth a pound 
of cure
out  better be out of the world than out 
of the fashion
garbage in, garbage out
murder will out
out of debt, out of danger
out of sight, out of mind
truth will out
when the wine is in, the wit is out
outside  there’s nothing so good for 
the inside of a man as the outside of 
a horse
over  it’s not over till it’s over
the opera ain’t over till the fat lady sings
the sharper the storm, the sooner it’s 
over
overload  don’t overload gratitude; if 
you do, she’ll kick
owe  pay as you go and nothing you’ll 
owe
pay what you owe and you’ll know what 
you own
own  a bawling cow soon forgets her 
own calf See a bellowing cow soon 
forgets her calf
the devil looks after his own
every cock will crow upon his own dung-
hill
every country has its own customs See so 
many countries, so many customs
every herring must hang by its own gill
every horse thinks its own pack heaviest
every land has its own law
every man is his own worst enemy
every man is the architect of his own 
fortune
every man must skin his own skunk
every man thinks his own geese swans
every tub must stand on its own bottom
he that complies against his will is of his 
own opinion still
if every man would sweep his own door-
step the city would soon be clean
it’s an ill bird that fouls its own nest
a man who is his own lawyer has a fool 
for his client
men are blind in their own cause
mind your own business
nobody should be judge in his own cause
paddle your own canoe
pay what you owe and you’ll know what 
you own
a prophet is not without honor, save in his 
own country
stand on your own two feet
to each his own
toot your own horn lest the same be 
never tooted
travel east and travel west, a man’s own 
home is still the best See east, west, 
home’s best
virtue is its own reward
water seeks its own level
what’s yours is mine, and what’s mine is 
my own 
when thieves fall out, honest men come 
by their own
wise men learn by other men’s mistakes, 
fools by their own See learn from the 
mistakes of others
you can’t beat a man at his own game
owner  the house shows the owner
obey orders, if you break owners
ox  beauty draws more than oxen See 
beauty draws with a single hair
better a dinner of herbs where love is than 
a stalled ox where hate is
pace  it’s the pace that kills
pack  every horse thinks its own pack 
heaviest
no names, no pack-drill
package  the best things come in small 
packages
Index by Key Word
401
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd401   401 1/29/07   5:24:14 PM
paddle  paddle your own canoe
padlock  wedlock is a padlock
pain  genius is an infi nite capacity for 
taking pains
no pain, no gain
pride feels no pain
there’s no pleasure without pain
paint  a blind man’s wife needs no paint
the devil is not as black as he is painted
the lion is not so fi erce as he is painted
pan  don’t jump from the frying pan 
into the fi re
if ifs and ans were pots and pans, there’d 
be no work for tinkers
paper  paper bleeds little
paper does not blush
a white wall is the fool’s writing paper
pardon  never ask pardon before you 
are accused
offenders never pardon
parent  the art of being a parent con-
sists of sleeping when the baby isn’t 
looking
caution is the parent of safety
parents are patterns
Paris  good Americans, when they die, 
go to Paris
parsley  parsley seed goes nine times to 
the devil
parsnip  fi ne words butter no parsnips
part  the best of friends must part
discretion is the better part of valor
a fool and his money are soon parted
if you’re not part of the solution, you’re 
part of the problem
pass  boys seldom make passes at girls 
who wear glasses
fancy passes beauty
nature passes nurture
nurture passes nature
this, too, shall pass
past  the age of miracles is past
the danger past and God forgotten
the mill cannot grind with the water that 
is past
past cure, past care
things past cannot be recalled
those who cannot remember the past are 
condemned to repeat it
what’s past is prologue
a word spoken is past recalling
pastime  he that would go to sea for 
pleasure would go to hell for a pas-
time
paternoster  no penny, no paternoster
path  the path of true love never runs 
smooth See the course of true love 
never did run smooth
patience  all commend patience, but 
none can endure to suffer
patience is a remedy for every sorrow
patience is a virtue
patriotism  patriotism is the last refuge 
of a scoundrel
pattern  parents are patterns
pave  the road to hell is paved with good 
intentions
pay  crime doesn’t pay
death pays all debts
he who pays the piper calls the tune
honesty is the best policy, though it may 
not pay the largest dividends See hon-
esty is the best policy
honesty pays
if you pay peanuts, you get monkeys
pay as you go and nothing you’ll owe
pay beforehand was never well served
pay what you owe and you’ll know what 
you own
speak not of my debts unless you mean 
to pay them
they that dance must pay the piper
the third time pays for all See the third 
time is the charm
worry is interest paid on trouble before 
it falls due
Index by Key Word
402
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd402   402 1/29/07   5:24:14 PM
you get what you pay for
you pays your money and you takes your 
choice
peace  if you want peace, prepare for 
war
nothing can bring you peace but yourself
peace makes plenty
there’s no peace for the wicked
peanut  if you pay peanuts, you get 
monkeys
pear  walnuts and pears you plant for 
your heirs
pearl  don’t cast your pearls before swine
peck  we must eat a peck of dirt before 
we die
peg  all words are pegs to hang ideas on 
you can’t put a square peg in a round 
hole
pen  the pen is mightier than the sword
penny  a bad penny always turns up
don’t spoil the ship for half a penny’s 
worth of tar
fi nd a penny, pick it up See see a pin and 
pick it up
in for a penny, in for a pound
no penny, no paternoster
a penny saved is a penny earned
penny wise and pound foolish
take care of the pennies and the dollars 
will take care of themselves
people  be nice to people on your way 
up because you’ll meet them on your 
way down
idle people have the least leisure
it takes all kinds of people to make a 
world
like people, like priest
like priest, like people See like people, 
like priest
most people consider thrift a fi ne virtue 
in ancestors
nobody ever went broke underestimating 
the intelligence of the American people
people are more easily led than driven
people who live in glass houses shouldn’t 
throw stones
the voice of the people is the voice of 
God
where there’s no vision, the people per-
ish
the world is a stage and all the people in it 
actors See all the world’s a stage
you can fool some of the people all of 
the time, and all of the people some of 
the time, but you can’t fool all of the 
people all of the time
percent  genius is one percent inspiration 
and ninety-nine percent perspiration
perfect  nobody is perfect
practice makes perfect
perfection  trifl es make perfection, and 
perfection is no trifl e
perfume  fl attery, like perfume, should 
be smelled but not swallowed
perish  he who lives by the sword shall 
perish by the sword See he who lives by 
the sword dies by the sword
where there’s no vision, the people per-
ish
perjury  Jove but laughs at lover’s per-
jury
perpetual  a contented mind is a per-
petual feast See a contented mind is a 
continual feast
person  if you want something done, ask 
a busy person
opportunity never knocks for persons not 
worth a rap
pessimist  the optimist’s cup is half full; 
the pessimist’s cup is half empty See the 
glass is either half empty or half full
physician  physician, heal thyself
the three doctors Diet, Quiet, and Tem-
perance are the best physicians See the 
best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, 
and Dr. Merryman
Index by Key Word
403
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd403   403 1/29/07   5:24:15 PM
a young barber and an old physician
pianist  don’t shoot the pianist, he’s 
doing his best
pick  even a blind pig occasionally picks 
up an acorn
hawks will not pick out hawks’ eyes
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, 
bad luck you’ll have all the day
pickle  hunger is the best pickle See 
hunger is the best sauce
picture  every picture tells a story
one picture is worth ten thousand words
pie  the devil makes his Christmas pies 
of lawyers’ tongues and clerks’ fi ngers
piecrust  promises, like piecrust, are 
made to be broken 
pig  even a blind pig occasionally picks 
up an acorn
if a pig had wings, it might fl y
if you would be happy for a week take 
a wife; if you would be happy for a 
month kill a pig; but if you would be 
happy all your life plant a garden
pigs are pigs
what can you expect from a pig but a 
grunt?
the young pig grunts like the old sow See 
the young cock crows as he heard the 
old one
pilot  in a calm sea every man is a pilot
pin  it’s a sin to steal a pin
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, 
bad luck you’ll have all the day
pinch  the wearer best knows where the 
shoe pinches
pint  you can’t get a quart into a pint 
pot
piper  he who pays the piper calls the tune 
See they that dance must pay the piper
they that dance must pay the piper
piss  piss or get off the pot 
pitch  he that touches pitch shall be 
defi led
pitcher  little pitchers have big ears
the pitcher will go to the well once too 
often
pitchfork  you can drive out nature 
with a pitchfork but she keeps on com-
ing back
pity  better be envied than pitied
pity is akin to love
place  the best place for criticism is in 
front of your mirror
lightning never strikes twice in the same 
place
one cannot be in two places at once
the only place where success comes before 
work is in a dictionary
a place for everything and everything in 
its place
there’s a time and place for everything
there’s no place like home
plague  please your eye and plague your 
heart
plant  if you would be happy for a week 
take a wife; if you would be happy for 
a month kill a pig; but if you would be 
happy all your life plant a garden
it’s not spring until you can plant your 
foot upon twelve daisies
walnuts and pears you plant for your 
heirs
plaster  patience is a plaster for all sores 
See patience is a remedy for every 
sorrow
play  all work and no play makes Jack 
a dull boy 
don’t play with edged tools See it’s ill jest-
ing with edged tools
fair play’s a jewel
give and take is fair play
if you play with fi re, you get burned
it’s not whether you win or lose, but how 
you play the game
Index by Key Word
404
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd404   404 1/29/07   5:24:15 PM
leave off while the play is good See quite 
while you are ahead
there’s many a good tune played on an 
old fi ddle
those who play at bowls must look out 
for rubbers
turnabout is fair play
when the cat’s away, the mice will play
work before play
player  lookers-on see more than play-
ers See lookers-on see most of the 
game
pleasant  little drops of water, little 
grains of sand, make a mighty ocean 
and a pleasant land
please  the clock goes as it pleases the 
clerk
little things please little minds
please your eye and plague your heart
you can’t please everybody
pleasure  business before pleasure
he that would go to sea for pleasure would 
go to hell for a pastime
never mix business with pleasure
stolen pleasures are sweetest See stolen 
waters are sweet
there’s no pleasure without pain
plenty  peace makes plenty 
a wet May brings plenty of hay
plum  the higher the tree, the sweeter 
the plum
plus  plus ça change, plus c’est la même 
chose See the more things change, the 
more they stay the same
poacher  an old poacher makes the best 
gamekeeper
pocket  a book is like a garden carried 
in the pocket
the devil dances in an empty pocket
money burns a hole in the pocket
shrouds have no pockets
wear your learning like your watch, in a 
private pocket
when a man’s single, his pockets will 
jingle
poet  poets are born, not made
point  possession is nine points of the law
poison  one man’s meat is another man’s 
poison
policy  honesty is the best policy
polish  look on the bright side, or polish 
up the dark one See always look on the 
bright side
politeness  politeness costs nothing and 
gains everything See civility costs noth-
ing
punctuality is the politeness of kings
politics  in politics a man must learn to 
rise above principle
politics makes strange bedfellows
pond  better a big fi sh in a little pond 
than a little fi sh in a big pond
poor  better be a poor man’s darling than 
a rich man’s slave See better be an old 
man’s darling than a young man’s slave
it’s a poor dog that’s not worth whistling 
for
it’s a poor heart that never rejoices
one law for the rich and another for the 
poor
the rich get richer and the poor get 
poorer
the rich man has his ice in the summer and 
the poor man gets his in the winter
pope  it’s ill sitting at Rome and striving 
with the Pope
populi  vox populi, vox Dei See the voice of 
the people is the voice of God
porch  if you can’t run with the big 
dogs, stay under the porch
port  any port in a storm
possess  patience is a virtue which few 
possess—some have a little, others 
have less See patience is a virtue
possession  possession is nine points 
of the law
Index by Key Word
405
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd405   405 1/29/07   5:24:15 PM
possible  all’s for the best in the best of 
all possible worlds
all things are possible with God
post  the post of honor is the post of 
danger
postern  a postern door makes a thief
pot  if ifs and ans were pots and pans, 
there’d be no work for tinkers
a little pot is soon hot
piss or get off the pot
the pot calls the kettle black
there’s a pot of gold at the end of the 
rainbow
a watched pot never boils
you can’t get a quart into a pint pot
pound  in for a penny, in for a pound
an ounce of common sense is worth a 
pound of theory
an ounce of discretion is worth a pound 
of wit
an ounce of practice is worth a pound of 
precept 
an ounce of prevention is worth a pound 
of cure
penny wise and pound foolish
take care of the pence and the pounds will 
take care of themselves See take care of 
the pennies and the dollars will take 
care of themselves
pour  it never rains but it pours
poverty  both poverty and prosper-
ity come from spending money—
prosperity from spending it wisely 
poverty comes from God, but not 
dirt
poverty is no disgrace, but it’s a great 
inconvenience
poverty is not a crime
sloth is the mother of poverty
when poverty comes in at the door, love 
fl ies out of the window
powder  put your trust in God, and 
keep your powder dry
power  anger without power is folly
art is power
knowledge is power
money is power
power corrupts, and absolute power cor-
rupts absolutely
practice  honesty is more praised than 
practiced
an ounce of practice is worth a pound of 
precept
practice makes perfect
practice what you preach
what a tangled web we weave when fi rst 
we practice to deceive 
praise  every cook praises his own 
broth
honesty is more praised than practiced
praise no man till he is dead
praise the bridge that carries you over
praise the child, and you make love to 
the mother
self-praise is no recommendation
pray  the family that prays together stays 
together
he that would learn to pray, let him go 
to sea
prayer  courage is fear that has said its 
prayers
if wind blows on you through a hole, say 
your prayers and mind your soul
preach  practice what you preach
preacher  a preacher’s son is often bad See 
clergymen’s sons always turn out badly
precept  example is better than precept
an ounce of practice is worth a pound of 
precept
precious  a good name is better than 
precious ointment
prejudice  no tree takes so deep a root 
as prejudice
prejudice is being down on what we are 
not up on
prejudice is the child of ignorance
Index by Key Word
406
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd406   406 1/29/07   5:24:15 PM
prepare  hope for the best and prepare 
for the worst
if you want peace, prepare for war
present  the absent are never without 
fault nor the present without excuse See 
he who is absent is always in the wrong
the golden age was never the present age
there’s no time like the present
preservation  self-preservation is the 
fi rst law of nature
preserve  alcohol will preserve anything 
but a secret
press  one volunteer is worth two 
pressed men
prevent  a stumble may prevent a fall
prevention  an ounce of prevention is 
worth a pound of cure
prevention is better than cure
prey   the fox preys furthest from his 
hole
price  every man has his price 
the price of liberty is eternal vigilance
a thing you don’t want is dear at any 
price
pride  pride feels no pain
pride goes before a fall
priest  like people, like priest
once a priest, always a priest
prince  punctuality is the politeness of 
princes See punctuality is the polite-
ness of kings
whosoever draws his sword against the 
prince must throw the scabbard away
principle  in politics a man must learn 
to rise above principle
prison  stone walls do not a prison 
make
private  wear your learning like your 
watch, in a private pocket
problem  if you’re not part of the solu-
tion, you’re part of the problem
procrastination  procrastination is the 
thief of time
produce  the only thing a heated argu-
ment ever produced is coolness
prologue  what’s past is prologue
prolong  medicine can prolong life, but 
death will seize the doctor, too
promise  promises, like piecrust, are 
made to be broken
the streets of hell are paved with promises 
See the road to hell is paved with good 
intentions
proof  the proof of the pudding is in 
the eating
prophet  jesters do oft prove prophets
a prophet is not without honor, save in his 
own country
propose  man proposes, God disposes
prosper  cheaters never prosper
ill-gotten goods seldom prosper See ill-
gotten goods never thrive
prosperity  both poverty and prosperity 
come from spending money—pros-
perity from spending it wisely
prosperity discovers vice; adversity, vir-
tue
prosperity is just around the corner
protect  God protect me from my 
friends—I can protect myself from my 
enemies See save us from our friends
heaven protects children, sailors, and 
drunken men 
prove  the exception proves the rule
jesters do oft prove prophets
a man is innocent until proven guilty
provide  take the goods the gods pro-
vide
providence  providence is always on the 
side of the big battalions
public  don’t wash your dirty linen in 
public
publicity  any publicity is good public-
ity
pudding  the proof of the pudding is in 
the eating
Index by Key Word
407
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd407   407 1/29/07   5:24:15 PM
puddle  better a big fi sh in a little pud-
dle than a little fi sh in a big puddle See 
better a big fi sh in a little pond than a 
little fi sh in a big pond
the sun loses nothing by shining into a 
puddle
pull  a horse can’t pull while kicking
punctuality  punctuality is the polite-
ness of kings
punctuality is the soul of business
punish  corporations have neither bod-
ies to be punished nor souls to be 
damned
pure  to the pure all things are pure
purpose  the devil can cite scripture for 
his purpose
there’s a season and a time for every 
purpose under the heaven See to every-
thing there is a season
purse  a fat kitchen makes a lean purse 
See a fat kitchen makes a lean will
a heavy purse makes a light heart
he that has a full purse never wanted a 
friend
light gains make heavy purses
a light purse makes a heavy heart
little and often fi lls the purse
you can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s 
ear
put  don’t put all your eggs in one 
basket
don’t put the cart before the horse
don’t take down a fence unless you are 
sure why it was put up
never put off until tomorrow what you 
can do today
put fi rst things fi rst See fi rst things fi rst
put your best foot forward
what you put off and what you put on, 
never change till May be gone See ne’er 
cast a clout till May be out
you can’t put an old head on young 
shoulders
you can’t put a square peg in a round 
hole
you can’t put new wine in old bottles
quack  if it looks like a duck, walks like a 
duck, and quacks like a duck, it’s a duck
quarrel  a bad workman quarrels with 
his tools
it takes two to make a quarrel
the quarrel of lovers is the renewal of 
love
quart  you can’t get a quart into a pint 
pot
queer  everybody’s queer but you and 
me, and even you are a little queer
there’s nowt so queer as folk
quench  dirty water will quench fi re
question  ask a silly question and you 
get a silly answer
ask me no questions and I’ll tell you no 
lies
a civil question deserves a civil answer
fools ask questions that wise men cannot 
answer
shoot fi rst and ask questions afterward
there are two sides to every question
quick  the obvious choice is usually a 
quick regret
quick ripe, quick rotten See soon ripe, 
soon rotten
quickly  he gives twice who gives 
quickly
the mouse that has but one hole is quickly 
taken
quickly come, quickly go
quiet  the best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. 
Quiet, and Dr. Merryman
quill  a goose quill is more dangerous 
than a lion’s claw
quit  quit while you are ahead
a winner never quits, and a quitter never 
wins
quitter  a winner never quits, and a 
quitter never wins
Index by Key Word
408
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd408   408 1/29/07   5:24:15 PM
quote  the devil can quote scripture to 
his own advantage See the devil can cite 
scripture for his purpose
rabbit  fi rst catch your rabbit and then 
make your stew See fi rst catch your hare
race  the race is not to the swift, nor the 
battle to the strong
slow and steady wins the race
rain  blessed are the dead that the rain 
rains on
dig a well before it rains See dig the well 
before you are thirsty
happy is the bride that the sun shines on, 
blessed is the corpse that the rain falls 
on See happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on
happy is the bride that the sun shines on, 
sorry is the bride that the rain rains 
on See happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on
into every life a little rain must fall
it never rains but it pours
rain before seven, fi ne before eleven
save something for a rainy day
rainbow  there’s a pot of gold at the end 
of the rainbow
raise  it takes a village to raise a child
rap  opportunity never knocks for per-
sons not worth a rap
rat  rats desert a sinking ship
reach  stretch your arm no further than 
your sleeve will reach
reap  as you sow, so shall you reap
they that sow the wind shall reap the 
whirlwind
reason  there’s reason in all things
recall  things past cannot be recalled
time lost cannot be recalled
a word spoken is past recalling
receive  it’s better to give than to 
receive 
receiver  if there were no receivers, 
there would be no thieves
reckon  short reckonings make long 
friends
truth is truth to the end of the reckoning
recommendation  a good face is a letter 
of recommendation
self-praise is no recommendation
record  a man’s best reputation for the 
future is his record of the past
red  red sky at night, sailor’s delight; 
red sky in the morning, sailors take 
warning
redress  a fault confessed is half 
redressed
reed  a reed before the wind lives on, 
while mighty oaks do fall
refuge  patriotism is the last refuge of a 
scoundrel
refuse  war will cease when men refuse 
to fi ght
regret  the obvious choice is usually a 
quick regret
regulate  accidents will happen in the 
best-regulated families
rejoice  it’s a poor heart that never 
rejoices
religion  a man without a religion is a 
horse without a bridle
remedy  avoidance is the only remedy
desperate diseases must have desperate 
remedies
patience is a remedy for every sorrow
the remedy may be worse than the disease 
there’s a remedy for everything except 
death
remember  those who cannot remember 
the past are condemned to repeat it
renew  the falling out of lovers is the 
renewing of love See the quarrel of lov-
ers is the renewal of love
renewal  the quarrel of lovers is the 
renewal of love
repair  who repairs not his gutters 
repairs his whole house
Index by Key Word
409
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd409   409 1/29/07   5:24:16 PM
repeat  history repeats itself
those who cannot remember the past are 
condemned to repeat it
repent  marry in haste, repent at lei-
sure
reply  silence is the fi ttest reply to folly
reputation  a good reputation is more 
valuable than money
a man’s best reputation for the future is 
his record of the past
require  everybody to whom much is 
given, of him will much be required
respond  many are called, but few 
respond See many are called, but few 
are chosen
rest  after dinner rest awhile, after sup-
per walk a mile
a change is as good as a rest
there’s no rest for the weary
there’s no rest for the wicked See there’s 
no peace for the wicked
retain  dreams retain the infi rmities of 
our character
return  the dog always returns to his 
vomit
drive nature out of the door and it will 
return by the window See you can drive 
out nature with a pitchfork but she 
keeps on coming back
send a fool to market and a fool he’ll 
return
the tongue always returns to the sore 
tooth
reveal  drunkenness reveals what sober-
ness conceals
revenge  neglect will kill an injury 
sooner than revenge
revenge is a dish best eaten cold
revenge is sweet
revenue  thrift is a great revenue
review  he who would write and can’t 
write can surely review
revolution  revolutions are not made 
with rose water
reward  desert and reward seldom keep 
company
virtue is its own reward
rich  better be a poor man’s darling than 
a rich man’s slave See better be an old 
man’s darling than a young man’s slave
it’s better to be born lucky than rich
one law for the rich and another for the 
poor
riches have wings
the rich get richer and the poor get 
poorer
the rich man has his ice in the summer and 
the poor man gets his in the winter
a rich man’s joke is always funny
riddance  good riddance to bad rubbish
ride  from the day you were born till 
you ride in a hearse, there’s nothing 
so bad but it might have been worse 
See nothing so bad but it might have 
been worse
give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride it to 
death
he who rides a tiger is afraid to dismount
if two ride on a horse, one must ride 
behind
if wishes were horses, beggars would 
ride
set a beggar on horseback, and he’ll ride 
to the devil
there’s no such thing as a free ride See 
there’s no such thing as a free lunch
rider  for want of a nail the shoe was 
lost, for want of a shoe the horse was 
lost, and for want of a horse the rider 
was lost
time is the rider that breaks youth
ridiculous  from the sublime to the 
ridiculous is only one step
right  the customer is always right
do right and fear no man
Index by Key Word
410
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd410   410 1/29/07   5:24:16 PM
god’s in his heaven; all’s right with the 
world
if you want something done right, do it 
yourself See if you want a thing done 
well, do it yourself 
it’ll all come right in the wash See it’ll all 
come out in the wash
it’s better to be right than in the majority
might makes right
two wrongs don’t make a right
ring  be the day weary or be the day 
long, at last it ringeth to evensong
give a thing, and take a thing, to wear the 
devil’s gold ring
ripe  soon ripe, soon rotten
rise  cream always rises to the top See 
cream always comes to the top
early to bed and early to rise, makes a man 
healthy, wealthy, and wise
every employee tends to rise to his level 
of incompetence
he who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day, but he that is in battle 
slain will never rise to fi ght again See he 
who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day
in politics a man must learn to rise above 
principle
a rising tide lifts all boats
a stream cannot rise above its source
river  you can’t step twice into the same 
river
road  all roads lead to Rome
good company on the road is the short-
est cut
it’s a long road that has no turning
the road to hell is paved with good inten-
tions
there’s no royal road to learning
rob  the back door robs the house See a 
postern door makes a thief
one thief robs another
robbery  a fair exchange is no robbery
robin  the robin and the wren are God’s 
cock and hen
Robin Hood  Robin Hood could brave 
all weathers but a thaw wind
rock (n.)  if frogs had wings, they 
wouldn’t bump their tails on rocks See 
if a pig had wings, it might fl y
who won’t be ruled by the rudder must 
be ruled by the rock
rock (v.)  don’t rock the boat
the hand that rocks the cradle rules the 
world
rod  spare the rod and spoil the child
roll  an apple doesn’t roll far from the 
tree See the apple never falls far from 
the tree
money is round and rolls away
a rolling stone gathers no moss
Roman  when in Rome, do as the 
Romans do 
Rome  all roads lead to Rome
better be fi rst in a village than second at 
Rome
it’s ill sitting at Rome and striving with 
the Pope
Nero fi ddled while Rome burned
Rome was not built in a day
when in Rome, do as the Romans do
room  a house without books is like a 
room without windows
there’s always room at the top
roost  curses, like chickens, come home 
to roost
the highest branch is not the safest 
roost
root  idleness is the root of all evil
the love of money is the root of all evil
money is the root of all evil
no tree takes so deep a root as prejudice
rope  give a man enough rope and he’ll 
hang himself
never speak of rope in the house of a man 
who has been hanged
Index by Key Word
411
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd411   411 1/29/07   5:24:16 PM
rose  life is no bed of roses
revolutions are not made with rose water
a rose by any other name would smell 
as sweet
a rose is a rose is a rose is a rose
there’s no rose without a thorn
rosebud  gather ye rosebuds while ye 
may
rot  one for the mouse, one for the 
crow, one to rot, one to grow
rotten  the rotten apple spoils the bar-
rel
small choice in rotten apples
something is rotten in the state of Den-
mark
soon ripe, soon rotten
rough  you have to take the rough with 
the smooth
round  love makes the world go round
money is round and rolls away
money makes the world go round
you can’t put a square peg in a round 
hole
roundabout  what you lose on the 
swings you gain on the roundabouts
royal  there’s no royal road to learning
rubber  those who play at bowls must 
look out for rubbers
rubbish  good riddance to bad rubbish
ruby  wisdom is better than rubies 
rudder  who won’t be ruled by the rud-
der must be ruled by the rock
rue  marry in May, rue for aye
rule  divide and rule See divide and 
conquer
don’t change the rules in the middle of 
the game
the exception proves the rule
the hand that rocks the cradle rules the 
world
rules are made to be broken
self-interest is the rule, self-sacrifi ce the 
exception
there’s an exception to every rule
who won’t be ruled by the rudder must 
be ruled by the rock
run  blood is thicker than water, but 
sometimes it runs mighty thin See 
blood is thicker than water
business is like a car, it will not run by 
itself except downhill
the course of true love never did run 
smooth
great minds run in the same channels See 
great minds think alike
he who fi ghts and runs away may live to 
fi ght another day
if you can’t run with the big dogs, stay 
under the porch
if you run after two hares, you will catch 
neither
the last drop makes the cup run over
still waters run deep
we must learn to walk before we can run
while two dogs are fi ghting for a bone, a 
third runs away with it
the world runs on wheels
you can run, but you can’t hide
you can’t run with the hare and hunt with 
the hounds
you never miss the water till the well 
runs dry
rush  don’t rush the cattle See hurry no 
man’s cattle
fools rush in where angels fear to tread
Russian  scratch a Russian and you fi nd 
a Tartar
rust  better to wear out than to rust 
out
Sabbath  the child that is born on the 
Sabbath day is bonny and blithe and 
good and gay
sack  an empty sack cannot stand 
upright
sacrifi ce  self-interest is the rule, self-
sacrifi ce the exception
Index by Key Word
412
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd412   412 1/29/07   5:24:16 PM
sad  it’s a sad heart that never rejoices 
See it’s a poor heart that never rejoices 
it’s a sad house where the hen crows 
louder than the cock
safe  better safe than sorry
he that is too secure is not safe
the highest branch is not the safest 
roost
it’s better to be on the safe side
safe bind, safe fi nd
safety  caution is the parent of safety
safety fi rst
there’s safety in numbers
said  See say
sail  hoist your sail when the wind is 
fair
sailor  heaven protects children, sailors, 
and drunken men
red sky at night, sailor’s delight; red sky in 
the morning, sailors take warning
saint  the devil was sick, the devil a saint 
would be; the devil was well, the devil 
a saint was he
an open door may tempt a saint
young saint, old devil
sake  deny self for self’s sake
salt  help you to salt, help you to sor-
row
same  don’t make the same mistake 
twice
great minds run in the same channels See 
great minds think alike
it’ll all be the same in a hundred years
lightning never strikes twice in the same 
place
the more things change, the more they 
stay the same
toot your own horn lest the same be 
never tooted
you can’t be in two places at the same 
time See one cannot be in two places 
at once
you can’t step twice into the same river
sand  footprints on the sands of time are 
not made by sitting down
little drops of water, little grains of sand, 
make a mighty ocean and a pleasant 
land
sapienti  verbum sapienti sat est See a word 
to the wise is suffi cient
sarà  che sarà, sarà See what will be, 
will be
sat  verbum sapienti sat est See a word to 
the wise is suffi cient
Saturday  Saturday’s child works hard 
for its living
sauce  hunger is the best sauce
what’s sauce for the goose is sauce for 
the gander
savage  music hath charms to soothe 
the savage breast
save  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; 
creep under the thorn, it can save you 
from harm
let your head save your heels
a penny saved is a penny earned
save at the spigot and waste at the bung 
See spare at the spigot, and let out the 
bunghole
save something for a rainy day
save us from our friends 
saving is getting
a stitch in time saves nine
say  courage is fear that has said its 
prayers
criticism is something you can avoid by 
saying nothing, doing nothing, and 
being nothing
do as I say, not as I do
easier said than done
if wind blows on you through a hole, say 
your prayers and mind your soul
it’s not what you say, but how you say it
least said, soonest mended
the more said, the less done
Index by Key Word
413
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd413   413 1/29/07   5:24:16 PM
never say die 
never say never
there’s many a true word said in jest See 
many a true word is spoken in jest
what everybody says must be true
what the soldier said isn’t evidence
who says A must say B
scabbard  one sword keeps another in 
its scabbard
whosoever draws his sword against the 
prince must throw the scabbard away
scarce  good men are scarce
scare  burn not your house to scare 
away the mice
scarlet  an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a 
varlet, though they be clad in silk or 
scarlet
scheme  the best-laid schemes of mice 
and men gang aft a-gley 
school  education doesn’t come by bump-
ing your head against the school house
experience keeps a dear school
never tell tales out of school
scorn  hell hath no fury like a woman 
scorned
scoundrel  patriotism is the last refuge 
of a scoundrel
scramble  scrambled eggs can’t be 
unscrambled See you can’t unscramble 
eggs
scratch  scratch a Russian and you fi nd 
a Tartar
you scratch my back and I’ll scratch 
yours 
scripture  the devil can cite scripture 
for his purpose
sea  he that would go to sea for pleasure 
would go to hell for a pastime
he that would learn to pray, let him go 
to sea
in a calm sea every man is a pilot
there are other fi sh in the sea
wine has drowned more men than the sea
worse things happen at sea
seaman  the good seaman is known in 
bad weather
season  everything is good in its season
knowledge and timber shouldn’t be much 
used until they are seasoned
to everything there is a season
second  better be fi rst in a village than 
second at Rome
second thoughts are best
secret  alcohol will preserve anything 
but a secret
a secret is either too good to keep or too 
bad not to tell
a secret’s a secret until it’s told
three may keep a secret, if two of them 
are dead
secure  he that is too secure is not safe
see  believe only half of what you see 
and nothing you hear
children should be seen and not heard 
a dwarf on a giant’s shoulders sees further 
of the two
four eyes see more than two
hear all, see all, say nowt
lookers-on see most of the game
many kiss the hand they wish to see cut 
off
monkey see, monkey do
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, 
bad luck you’ll have all the day
seeing is believing
see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil
seldom seen, soon forgotten
there are none so blind as those who will 
not see
they that live longest see most
what the eye doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t 
grieve over 
what you see is what you get
Index by Key Word
414
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd414   414 1/29/07   5:24:16 PM
seed  the blood of the martyrs is the 
seed of the church
good seed makes a good crop
one year’s seeding makes seven years’ 
weeding
parsley seed goes nine times to the devil
seek  ask, and it shall be given you; 
seek, and ye shall fi nd; knock, and it 
shall be opened unto you
seek and you shall fi nd
water seeks its own level
seem  be what you would seem to be
seen  See see
seize  medicine can prolong life, but 
death will seize the doctor, too
seize the day
self  deny self for self’s sake
self-deceit is the easiest of any
self-interest is the rule, self-sacrifi ce the 
exception
self-praise is no recommendation
self-preservation is the fi rst law of nature
sell  buy in the cheapest market and sell 
in the dearest
never sell America short
seller  the buyer needs a thousand eyes, 
the seller wants but one
send  God never sends mouths but he 
sends meat
God sends meat, but the devil sends 
cooks
the gods send nuts to those who have no 
teeth
never send a boy to do a man’s job
send a fool to market and a fool he’ll 
return
sense  ask advice, but use your own 
common sense
an ounce of common sense is worth a 
pound of theory
sermon  a good example is the best 
sermon
servant  fi re is a good servant but a bad 
master
serve  any stick will serve to beat a dog 
with See it’s easy to fi nd a stick to beat 
a dog 
fi rst come, fi rst served
if you would be well served, serve yourself
no man can serve two masters
pay beforehand was never well served
revenge is a dish best served cold See 
revenge is a dish best eaten cold
they also serve who only stand and wait
you can’t serve God and mammon
youth must be served
set  don’t set a wolf to watch the sheep 
See don’t let the fox guard the hen-
house
a dripping June sets all in tune
man’s work lasts till set of sun; woman’s 
work is never done See a woman’s work 
is never done
set a beggar on horseback, and he’ll ride 
to the devil
set a thief to catch a thief
sow dry and set wet
seven  the fi rst seven years are the hard-
est
a fool can ask more questions in an hour 
than a wise man can answer in seven 
years See fools ask questions that wise 
men cannot answer
give me a child for the fi rst seven years 
and he is mine for life
keep a thing seven years and you’ll fi nd 
a use for it
one year’s seeding makes seven years’ 
weeding
rain before seven, fi ne before eleven
six hours’ sleep for a man, seven for a 
woman, and eight for a fool
you should know a man seven years 
before you stir his fi re
Index by Key Word
415
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd415   415 1/29/07   5:24:17 PM
shadow  catch not at shadows and lose 
the substance
coming events cast their shadows before
old sins cast long shadows
shallow  cross the stream where it is 
shallowest
shame  fool me once, shame on you; 
fool me twice, shame on me
tell the truth and shame the devil
share  charity is not a bone you throw 
to a dog but a bone you share with a 
dog
a secret shared is no secret See a secret’s a 
secret until it’s told
share and share alike
a trouble shared is a trouble halved
sharp  the sharper the storm, the sooner 
it’s over
the sweetest wine makes the sharpest 
vinegar See from the sweetest wine, the 
tartest vinegar
sharpen  necessity sharpens industry
shear  god tempers the wind to the 
shorn lamb
many go out for wool and come home 
shorn
sheep  a bleating sheep loses a bite
don’t set a wolf to watch the sheep See 
don’t let the fox guard the henhouse
if one sheep leaps over the ditch, all the 
rest will follow
it’s a foolish sheep that makes the wolf his 
confessor
one might as well be hanged for a sheep 
as for a lamb
there’s a black sheep in every fl ock
shell  half an egg is better than an empty 
shell See half a loaf is better than no 
bread
shepherd  red sky at night, shepherd’s 
delight; red sky in the morning, shep-
herd’s warning See red sky at night, 
sailor’s delight; red sky in the morning, 
sailors take warning
shift  you can’t shift an old tree without 
it dying
shine  happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on 
make hay while the sun shines
the sun loses nothing by shining into a 
puddle
ship  don’t give up the ship
don’t spoil the ship for half a penny’s 
worth of tar
little leaks sink the ship
loose lips sink ships
one hand for yourself and one for the 
ship
rats desert a sinking ship
shirk  sin, sorrow, and work are the 
things that men can’t shirk
shirt  near is my shirt, but nearer is 
my skin
shirtsleeve  from shirtsleeves to shirt-
sleeves is only three generations
shit  shit happens
shit or get off the pot See piss or get off 
the pot
shoe  for want of a nail the shoe was 
lost, for want of a shoe the horse was 
lost, and for want of a horse the rider 
was lost
if the shoe fi ts, wear it
it’s ill waiting for dead men’s shoes
the shoe is on the other foot
the wearer best knows where the shoe 
pinches
you need more than dancing shoes to be 
a dancer
shoemaker  the shoemaker’s child 
always goes barefoot
shoot  action without thought is like 
shooting without aim
don’t shoot the messenger
Don’t shoot the pianist, he’s doing his best
Index by Key Word
416
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd416   416 1/29/07   5:24:17 PM
a fool’s bolt is soon shot
shoot fi rst and ask questions afterward
shop  keep your shop and your shop will 
keep you
shopkeeper  the English are a nation of 
shopkeepers
shore  little boats should stay close to 
shore
shorn  See shear
short  art is long and life is short
the day is short and the work is long
good company on the road is the short-
est cut
life is short and sweet
life is short and time is swift
life is too short
the longest way around is the shortest 
way home
long foretold, long last; short notice, 
soon past
never sell America short
a short horse is soon curried
short reckonings make long friends
short visits make long friends
shorten  cheerful company shortens the 
miles See good company on the road is 
the shortest cut
shoulder  a dwarf on a giant’s shoulders 
sees further of the two
you can’t put an old head on young 
shoulders
shout  don’t shout until you are out of 
the woods
show  give a man a fi sh, and you feed 
him for a day; show him how to fi sh, 
and you feed him for a lifetime
the higher the monkey climbs the more he 
shows his tail
the house shows the owner
if you can’t bite, never show your teeth
show me a liar and I will show you a 
thief
the show must go on
straws show which way the wind blows
shower  April showers bring May fl ow-
ers
shroud  shrouds have no pockets
shut  away goes the devil when he fi nds 
the door shut against him
don’t shut the barn door after the horse 
is stolen
a door must be either shut or open
every door may be shut but death’s door
keep your eyes wide open before mar-
riage, half shut afterward
keep your mouth shut and your eyes open
a shut mouth catches no fl ies
when one door shuts, another opens See 
when one door closes, another one 
opens
shy  once bitten, twice shy
once burned, twice shy
sick  the devil was sick, the devil a saint 
would be; the devil was well, the devil 
a saint was he
hope deferred makes the heart sick
sickness  health is not valued till sick-
ness comes
side  always look on the bright side
bread always falls buttered side down
the grass is always greener on the other 
side of the fence
it’s better to be on the safe side
providence is always on the side of the big 
battalions
there are two sides to every question
sight  in vain the net is spread in the 
sight of the bird
out of sight, out of mind
sign  blushing is a sign of grace
silence  silence gives consent
silence is golden
silence is the fi ttest reply to folly
speech is silver, but silence is golden
silent  small sorrows speak; great ones 
are silent
Index by Key Word
417
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd417   417 1/29/07   5:24:17 PM
there’s a time to speak and a time to be 
silent
silk  an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, 
though they be clad in silk or scarlet
you can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s 
ear
silly  ask a silly question and you get a 
silly answer
silver  every cloud has a silver lining
genius without education is like silver in 
the mine
speech is silver, but silence is golden
similarly  when you argue with a fool, 
make sure he isn’t similarly engaged
similia  similia similibus curantur See like 
cures like
similibus  similia similibus curantur See 
like cures like
sin  charity covers a multitude of sins
it’s a sin to steal a pin
let him who is without sin cast the fi rst 
stone
old sins cast long shadows
sin, sorrow, and work are the things that 
men can’t shirk
there’s a sin of omission as well as of 
commission
sincere  imitation is the sincerest form 
of fl attery
sing  America is a tune: it must be sung 
together
little birds that can sing and won’t sing 
must be made to sing
the opera ain’t over till the fat lady sings
sing before breakfast, cry before night
whose bread I eat, his song I sing
single  beauty draws with a single hair
the longest journey begins with a single 
step See a journey of a thousand miles 
begins with one step
when a man’s single, his pockets will 
 jingle
singly  misfortunes never come singly
sink  little leaks sink the ship
loose lips sink ships
rats desert a sinking ship
sinner  a young saint, an old sinner See 
young saint, old devil
sit  after dinner sit awhile, after supper 
walk a mile See after dinner rest awhile, 
after supper walk a mile
close sits my shirt, but closer my skin 
See near is my shirt, but nearer is my 
skin
footprints on the sands of time are not 
made by sitting down
it’s as cheap sitting as standing
it’s ill sitting at Rome and striving with 
the Pope
when two ride one horse, one must sit 
behind See if two ride on a horse, one 
must ride behind
six  it’s six of one and half a dozen of 
the other
six hours’ sleep for a man, seven for a 
woman, and eight for a fool
size  it’s not the size of the dog in the 
fi ght, it’s the size of the fi ght in the 
dog
skeleton  there’s a skeleton in every 
closet
skin  beauty is only skin deep
every man must skin his own skunk
near is my shirt, but nearer is my skin
there’s more than one way to skin a cat
skirts  the devil gets up to the belfry by 
the vicar’s skirts
skittle  life isn’t all beer and skittles
skunk  every man must skin his own 
skunk
sky  if the sky falls, we shall catch larks
red sky at night, sailor’s delight; red sky in 
the morning, sailors take warning
the sky’s the limit
slain  See slay
Index by Key Word
418
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd418   418 1/29/07   5:24:17 PM
slave  better be an old man’s darling 
than a young man’s slave
slay  he who fi ghts and runs away may 
live to fi ght another day, but he that is 
in battle slain will never rise to fi ght 
again See he who fi ghts and runs away 
may live to fi ght another day
sleep   the art of being a parent con-
sists of sleeping when the baby isn’t 
looking
let sleeping dogs lie
one hour’s sleep before midnight is worth 
two after
six hours’ sleep for a man, seven for a 
woman, and eight for a fool
sleep is the brother of death
there’ll be sleeping enough in the grave
sleeve  stretch your arm no further than 
your sleeve will reach
slender  he that lives on hope has a 
slender diet See he that lives on hope 
will die fasting 
slice  give a loaf and beg a slice
a slice off a cut loaf isn’t missed
slip  a slip of the lip will sink a ship See 
loose lips sink ships
there’s many a slip between cup and lip
sloth  all things are easy to industry, all 
things diffi cult to sloth
sloth is the mother of poverty
slow  slow and steady wins the race
slow but sure
slowly  make haste slowly
the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceedingly small
small  the best things come in small 
packages
it’s a small world
a man wrapped up in himself makes a very 
small bundle
the mills of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceedingly small
small choice in rotten apples 
a small gift usually gets small thanks
small is beautiful
small leaks sink big ships See little leaks 
sink the ship
small sorrows speak; great ones are silent
small things affect light minds See little 
things please little minds
wink at small faults
smell  fi sh and visitors smell in three 
days See fi sh and guests stink after 
three days
fl attery, like perfume, should be smelled 
but not swallowed
money has no smell
a rose by any other name would smell 
as sweet
smock  near is my kirtle, but nearer 
is my smock See near is my shirt, but 
nearer is my skin
smoke  love and smoke cannot be hid-
den See love and a cough cannot be hid
much smoke, little fi re
there’s no smoke without fi re
smooth  the course of true love never 
did run smooth
you have to take the rough with the 
smooth
snare  an old fox is not easily snared
snooze  you snooze, you lose
snow   the north wind doth blow and we 
shall have snow
so  so many countries, so many customs
so many men, so many opinions
sober  wanton kittens make sober cats
soberness  drunkenness reveals what 
soberness conceals
society  gossip is the lifeblood of society
soft  soft and fair goes far
a soft answer turns away wrath
softly  fair and softly goes far in a day
softly, softly, catchee monkey
speak softly and carry a big stick
Index by Key Word
419
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd419   419 1/29/07   5:24:17 PM
soldier  every soldier has the baton of a 
fi eld-marshal in his knapsack
the fi rst duty of a soldier is obedience
old soldiers never die
soldiers and travelers may lie in authority 
See a traveler may lie with authority
what the soldier said isn’t evidence
solitude  a great city, a great solitude
solution  if you’re not part of the solu-
tion, you’re part of the problem
some  you can fool some of the people 
all of the time, and all of the people 
some of the time, but you can’t fool all 
of the people all of the time
you win some, you lose some
somebody  you can’t beat somebody 
with nobody
something  gambling is getting nothing 
for something
save something for a rainy day
something is better than nothing
something is rotten in the state of Den-
mark
you don’t get something for nothing
son  clergymen’s sons always turn out 
badly
like father, like son
a son is a son till he gets him a wife, a 
daughter’s a daughter all of her life
song  whose bread I eat, his song I sing
songless  a believer is a songless bird 
in a cage
soon  bad news always comes too soon 
See he comes too early who brings bad 
news
better three hours too soon than a minute 
too late See it’s better to be an hour too 
early than a minute too late
God takes soonest those he loves best
least said, soonest mended
seldom seen, soon forgotten
the sharper the storm, the sooner it’s 
over
the sooner begun, the sooner done
sooner said than done See easier said than 
done
soon ripe, soon rotten
soothe  music hath charms to soothe 
the savage breast
sore  patience is a plaster for all sores See 
patience is a remedy for every sorrow
the tongue always returns to the sore 
tooth
sorrow  help you to salt, help you to 
sorrow
he that goes a-borrowing, goes a-sor-
rowing
one for sorrow; two for mirth; three for a 
wedding; four for a birth
patience is a remedy for every sorrow
sin, sorrow, and work are the things that 
men can’t shirk
small sorrows speak; great ones are silent
sorrow comes unsent for
sorry  better safe than sorry
happy is the bride that the sun shines on, 
sorry is the bride that the rain rains 
on See happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on
sort  it takes all sorts to make a world 
See it takes all kinds of people to make 
a world
soul  brevity is the soul of wit
confession is good for the soul
corporations have neither bodies to be 
punished nor souls to be damned
the eyes are the mirrors of the soul
if wind blows on you through a hole, say 
your prayers and mind your soul
punctuality is the soul of business
sound  empty vessels make the most 
sound
source  a stream cannot rise above its 
source
sow (n.)  you can’t make a silk purse out 
of a sow’s ear
Index by Key Word
420
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd420   420 1/29/07   5:24:17 PM
sow (v.)  as you sow, so shall you reap
sow dry and set wet
they that sow the wind shall reap the 
whirlwind
spade  call a spade a spade
span  See spin
spare  spare and have is better than 
spend and crave
spare at the spigot, and let out the bunghole
spare the rod and spoil the child
spare well and have to spend
spare when you’re young and spend when 
you’re old
speak  actions speak louder than words
children and fools speak the truth
everybody speaks well of the bridge that 
carries him over See praise the bridge 
that carries you over
it’s ill speaking between a full man and 
a fasting
many a true word is spoken in jest
never speak ill of the dead
never speak of rope in the house of a man 
who has been hanged
nobody believes a liar when he speaks the 
truth See a liar is not believed when he 
tells the truth
out of the fullness of the heart the mouth 
speaks
see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil
small sorrows speak; great ones are silent
some folks speak from experience; 
others, from experience, don’t speak
speak not of my debts unless you mean 
to pay them
speak of the devil and he always appears
speak softly and carry a big stick
speak the truth and shame the devil See 
tell the truth and shame the devil
there’s a time to speak and a time to be 
silent
think all you speak, but speak not all you 
think
think before you speak
think much, speak little, and write less
those who know don’t speak; those who 
speak don’t know
who knows most, speaks least
a word spoken is past recalling
species  the female of the species is 
deadlier than the male
speculate  if you don’t speculate, you 
can’t accumulate
speech  speech is silver, but silence is 
golden
speed  more haste, less speed
spend  both poverty and prosperity 
come from spending money—pros-
perity from spending it wisely
spare and have is better than spend and 
crave
spare well and have to spend
spare when you’re young and spend when 
you’re old
what’s got over the devil’s back is spent 
under his belly
when house and land are gone and spent, 
then learning is most excellent
spice  variety is the spice of life
spider  if you want to live and thrive, let 
the spider run alive
spigot  spare at the spigot, and let out 
the bunghole
spill  it’s no use crying over spilled milk
spin  when Adam delved and Eve span, 
who was then the gentleman?
spirit  the spirit is willing but the fl esh 
is weak
spite  don’t cut off your nose to spite 
your face 
spoil  better one house spoiled than 
two
don’t spoil the ship for half a penny’s 
worth of tar
if and an spoils many a good charter
the rotten apple spoils the barrel
Index by Key Word
421
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd421   421 1/29/07   5:24:17 PM
spare the rod and spoil the child
too many cooks spoil the broth
to the victor belong the spoils
spoken  See speak
spoon  he who sups with the devil 
should have a long spoon
spot  the leopard can’t change its spots
sprat  throw out a sprat to catch a 
mackerel
spread  in vain the net is spread in the 
sight of the bird
spring  hope springs eternal in the 
human breast
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love
it’s not spring until you can plant your 
foot upon twelve daisies
one swallow makes not a spring, nor one 
woodchuck a winter See one swallow 
does not make a summer
square  you can’t put a square peg in a 
round hole
squeaky  the squeaky wheel gets the oil 
See the squeaky wheel gets the grease
stable  it’s too late to shut the stable 
door after the horse has bolted See 
don’t shut the barn door after the 
horse is stolen
the man who is born in a stable is not a 
horse
staff  bread is the staff of life
stage  all the world’s a stage
stain  true blue will never stain
stall  better a dinner of herbs where 
love is than a stalled ox where hate is
stand  an empty sack cannot stand 
upright
every tub must stand on its own bottom
a house divided against itself cannot 
stand
if you can’t stand the heat, get out of the 
kitchen
it’s as cheap sitting as standing
stand on your own two feet
they also serve who only stand and wait
united we stand, divided we fall
star  hitch your wagon to a star
start  don’t start anything you can’t fi nish
starve  feed a cold and starve a fever
while the grass grows, the steed starves
state  something is rotten in the state 
of Denmark
statistics  there are lies, damned lies, 
and statistics
stay  the family that prays together stays 
together
if you can’t run with the big dogs, stay 
under the porch
little boats should stay close to shore
the more things change, the more they 
stay the same
steady  full cup, steady hand
slow and steady wins the race
steal  call a man a thief and he will steal
don’t shut the barn door after the horse 
is stolen
it’s a sin to steal a pin
stolen fruit is sweet See forbidden fruit 
is sweet 
stolen waters are sweet
steed  while the grass grows, the steed 
starves
steel  the tongue is not steel, but it cuts
step  the fi rst step is the hardest
from the sublime to the ridiculous is only 
one step
a journey of a thousand miles begins with 
one step
one step at a time
the only difference between stumbling 
blocks and stepping-stones is the way 
you use them
step on a crack, break your mother’s back
you can’t step twice into the same river
Index by Key Word
422
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd422   422 1/29/07   5:24:18 PM
stern  a stern chase is a long chase 
stew  fi rst catch your rabbit and then 
make your stew See fi rst catch your hare
stick (n.)  it’s easy to fi nd a stick to 
beat a dog
speak softly and carry a big stick 
sticks and stones may break my bones, but 
names will never hurt me
stick (v.)  let the cobbler stick to his 
last
stick to your guns
throw dirt enough, and some will stick
still  a still tongue makes a wise head
still waters run deep
the vicar of Bray will be vicar of Bray still
stink (n.)  the devil always leaves a stink 
behind him
stink (v.)  fi sh and guests stink after 
three days
a fi sh stinks from the head
the more you stir it, the worse it stinks
stir  the more you stir it, the worse it 
stinks
you should know a man seven years 
before you stir his fi re
stitch  a stitch in time saves nine
stolen  See steal
stomach  an army marches on its 
stomach
a growing youth has a wolf in his stomach
a hungry stomach has no ears
the way to a man’s heart is through his 
stomach
stone  constant dropping wears away 
a stone
drive gently over the stones
leave no stone unturned
let him who is without sin cast the fi rst 
stone
the only difference between stumbling 
blocks and stepping-stones is the way 
you use them
people who live in glass houses shouldn’t 
throw stones
a rolling stone gathers no moss
sticks and stones may break my bones, but 
words will never hurt me
stone-dead hath no fellow
stone walls do not a prison make
you buy land, you buy stones; you buy 
meat, you buy bones
you can’t get blood from a stone
stool  between two stools one falls to 
the ground
stop  when you are in a hole, stop digging
storm  after a storm comes a calm 
any port in a storm
the sharper the storm, the sooner it’s over
story  every picture tells a story
one story is good till another is told
strange  adversity makes strange bed-
fellows
fact is stranger than fi ction
politics makes strange bedfellows
truth is stranger than fi ction
stranger  be kind to your friends; if it 
weren’t for them, you would be a total 
stranger
straw  a drowning man will catch at a 
straw
it’s the last straw that breaks the camel’s 
back
straws show which way the wind blows
you can’t make bricks without straw
stream  cross the stream where it is 
shallowest
don’t change horses in the middle of 
the stream See don’t swap horses in 
midstream 
a stream cannot rise above its source
strive not against the stream
street  the streets of hell are paved with 
promises See the road to hell is paved 
with good intentions
Index by Key Word
423
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd423   423 1/29/07   5:24:18 PM
strength  union is strength
wisdom goes beyond strength
strengthen  as the day lengthens, so the 
cold strengthens 
stretch  everybody stretches his legs 
according to the length of his coverlet
stretch your arm no further than your 
sleeve will reach
strife  haste makes waste, and waste 
makes want, and want makes strife 
between a good man and his wife See 
haste makes waste
strike  lightning never strikes twice in 
the same place
strike while the iron is hot
strive  it’s ill sitting at Rome and striv-
ing with the Pope
strive not against the stream
stroke  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; 
creep under the thorn, it can save you 
from harm
different strokes for different folks
little strokes fell great oaks
strong  a chain is no stronger than its 
weakest link
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle 
to the strong
stubborn  facts are stubborn things
stuff  stuff a cold and starve a fever See 
feed a cold and starve a fever
stumble  the only difference between 
stumbling blocks and stepping-stones 
is the way you use them
a stumble may prevent a fall
you can’t build a church with stumbling 
blocks
stupid  silence is the best answer to the 
stupid See silence is the fi ttest reply 
to folly
style  the style is the man
sublime  from the sublime to the ridicu-
lous is only one step
substance  catch not at shadows and 
lose the substance
substitute  in war there is no substitute 
for victory
succeed  if at fi rst you don’t succeed, 
try, try again
nothing succeeds like success
success  nothing succeeds like success
the only place where success comes before 
work is in a dictionary
success breeds success
success has many fathers, while failure is 
an orphan
success is never fi nal
you can’t argue with success
such  there’s no such thing as a free 
lunch
there’s no such thing as bad weather, only 
the wrong clothes
suck  don’t teach your grandmother to 
suck eggs
sucker  never give a sucker an even break
there’s a sucker born every minute
suckling  out of the mouths of babes 
and sucklings come great truths
sudden  hasty climbers have sudden falls
sue  sue a beggar and catch a louse
suffer  all commend patience, but none 
can endure to suffer
suffi cient  suffi cient unto the day is the 
evil thereof
a word to the wise is suffi cient
summer  one swallow does not make a 
summer
the rich man has his ice in the summer and 
the poor man gets his in the winter
winter fi nds out what summer lays up
you never know a man until you bed 
with him a winter and summer See 
you never know a man until you live 
with him
sun  happy is the bride that the sun 
shines on
Index by Key Word
424
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd424   424 1/29/07   5:24:18 PM
if there were no clouds, we shouldn’t 
enjoy the sun
make hay while the sun shines
man’s work lasts till set of sun; woman’s 
work is never done See a woman’s work 
is never done
never let the sun go down on your anger
the sun loses nothing by shining into a 
puddle
there’s nothing new under the sun
sung  See sing
sunset  laugh before breakfast, cry 
before sunset See sing before breakfast, 
cry before night 
sup  he who sups with the devil should 
have a long spoon
supper  after dinner rest awhile, after 
supper walk a mile
hope is a good breakfast but a bad supper
if you sing before breakfast, you’ll cry 
before supper See sing before breakfast, 
cry before night
sure  slow but sure
slow but sure wins the race See slow and 
steady wins the race
talk of the devil and he’s sure to appear
suspicion  Caesar’s wife must be above 
suspicion
swallow (n.)  one swallow does not 
make a summer
swallow (v.)  fl attery, like perfume, 
should be smelled but not swallowed
it’s idle to swallow the cow and choke 
on the tail
swan  every man thinks his own geese 
swans
swap  don’t swap horses in midstream
sweat  no sweat, no sweet See no pain, 
no gain
sweep  blind chance sweeps the world 
along
if every man would sweep his own door-
step the city would soon be clean
a new broom sweeps clean
sweep your own doorstep clean
sweet  forbidden fruit is sweet 
from the sweetest wine, the tartest vin-
egar
the higher the tree, the sweeter the plum
life is short and sweet
little fi sh are sweet
the nearer the bone, the sweeter the fl esh
no sweat, no sweet See no pain, no gain
revenge is sweet
a rose by any other name would smell 
as sweet
stolen waters are sweet
you have to take the bitter with the 
sweet
swift  life is short and time is swift
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle 
to the strong
swim  don’t go near the water until you 
learn how to swim
swine  don’t cast your pearls before 
swine
swing  what you lose on the swings you 
gain on the roundabouts
sword  gluttony kills more than the 
sword
he who lives by the sword dies by the 
sword
one sword keeps another in its scabbard
the pen is mightier than the sword
whosoever draws his sword against the 
prince must throw the scabbard away
table  welcome is the best dish on the 
table See welcome is the best cheer
tail  better be the head of a dog than the 
tail of a lion
the cow knows not the value of her tail till 
she has lost it
heads I win, tails you lose
he who has a tiger by the tail dare not let 
go See he who rides a tiger is afraid to 
dismount
Index by Key Word
425
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd425   425 1/29/07   5:24:18 PM
the higher the monkey climbs the more he 
shows his tail
if frogs had wings, they wouldn’t bump 
their tails on rocks See if a pig had 
wings, it might fl y
it’s idle to swallow the cow and choke 
on the tail
tailor  nine tailors make a man
the tailor makes the man
take  blessings brighten as they take 
their fl ight
the devil takes care of his own See the 
devil looks after his own
don’t take down a fence unless you are 
sure why it was put up
every man for himself and the devil take 
the hindmost
genius is an infi nite capacity for taking 
pains
give and take is fair play
give a thing, and take a thing, to wear the 
devil’s gold ring
God takes soonest those he loves best
it takes a heap of living to make a house 
a home
it takes all kinds of people to make a 
world
it takes a thief to catch a thief See set a 
thief to catch a thief
it takes a village to raise a child
it takes money to make money
it takes one to know one
it takes three generations to make a 
gentleman
it takes two to make a bargain
it takes two to make a quarrel
it takes two to tango
the Lord gives and the Lord takes away
a mother can take care of ten children, 
but sometimes ten children can’t take 
care of one mother
the mouse that has but one hole is quickly 
taken
neither give nor take offense
take care of number one
take care of the pennies and the dollars 
will take care of themselves
take the goods the gods provide
take the will for the deed
take things as they come
take time by the forelock
when you go to dance, take heed whom 
you take by the hand
you can take a horse to the water, but you 
can’t make him drink See you can lead 
a horse to water, but you can’t make 
him drink
you can take the boy out of the country 
but you can’t take the country out of 
the boy
you can’t take it with you
you have to take the bitter with the sweet
you have to take the rough with the 
smooth
you must take two bears to live with 
you—bear and forbear See bear and 
forbear
you pays your money and you takes your 
choice
tale  dead men tell no tales
a good tale is not the worse for being 
told twice
never tell tales out of school
a tale never loses in the telling
talk  don’t talk the talk if you can’t walk 
the walk
everybody talks about the weather, but 
nobody does anything about it
money talks
talk is cheap
talk of the devil and he’s sure to appear 
See speak of the devil and he always 
appears
tangle  what a tangled web we weave 
when fi rst we practice to deceive
tango  it takes two to tango
tar  don’t spoil the ship for half a pen-
ny’s worth of tar
Index by Key Word
426
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd426   426 1/29/07   5:24:18 PM
tart  from the sweetest wine, the tartest 
vinegar
Tartar  scratch a Russian and you fi nd 
a Tartar
taste  every man to his taste
tastes differ
there’s no accounting for tastes
there’s no disputing about tastes
tatter  there’s many a good cock come 
out of a tattered bag
tax  nothing is certain but death and 
taxes
teach  don’t teach your grandmother 
to suck eggs
those who can, do; those who can’t, 
teach
you can’t teach an old dog new tricks
teacher  experience is the best teacher
experience is the teacher of fools
nobody forgets a good teacher
tear  don’t tear down a wall unless you 
are sure why it was put up See don’t 
take down a fence unless you are sure 
why it was put up
it’s easier to tear down than to build up
teeth  See tooth
tell  ask me no questions and I’ll tell 
you no lies
blood will tell
dead men tell no tales
a good tale is not the worse for being 
told twice
a liar is not believed when he tells the 
truth
never tell tales out of school
one story is good till another is told
a secret is either too good to keep or too 
bad not to tell
a secret’s a secret until it’s told
a tale never loses in the telling
tell it not in Gath
tell not all you know, nor do all you can
tell the truth and shame the devil
time will tell
you can’t tell a book by its cover See don’t 
judge a book by its cover
temper  God tempers the wind to the 
shorn lamb
temperance  the three doctors Diet, 
Quiet, and Temperance are the best 
physicians See the best doctors are Dr. 
Diet, Dr. Quiet, and Dr. Merryman
temps  autres temps, autres moeurs See 
other times, other manners
tempt  an open door may tempt a saint
tempus  tempus fugit See time fl ies
ten  genius is ten percent inspiration 
and ninety percent perspiration See 
genius is one percent inspiration and 
ninety-nine percent perspiration
a mother can take care of ten children, 
but sometimes ten children can’t take 
care of one mother
one picture is worth ten thousand words
a volunteer is worth ten pressed men See 
one volunteer is worth two pressed 
men
tenth  possession is nine-tenths of the 
law See possession is nine points of 
the law
terrible  a mind is a terrible thing to 
waste
thanks  a small gift usually gets small 
thanks
thaw  Robin Hood could brave all weath-
ers but a thaw wind
themselves  God helps those who help 
themselves
theory  an ounce of common sense is 
worth a pound of theory
thereof  suffi cient unto the day is the 
evil thereof
thick  blood is thicker than water
faults are thick where love is thin
thief  call a man a thief and he will steal
the hole calls the thief
if there were no receivers, there would 
be no thieves
Index by Key Word
427
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd427   427 1/29/07   5:24:18 PM
a liar is worse than a thief
little thieves are hanged, but great ones 
escape
once a thief, always a thief
one thief robs another
opportunity makes a thief
a postern door makes a thief
procrastination is the thief of time
set a thief to catch a thief
show me a liar and I will show you a 
thief
there’s honor among thieves
when thieves fall out, honest men come 
by their own
thin  blood is thicker than water, but 
sometimes it runs mighty thin See 
blood is thicker than water
faults are thick where love is thin
thing  all good things must come to an 
end
all things will pass See this, too, shall 
pass
the best things come in small packages
the best things in life are free
fi rst things fi rst
give a thing, and take a thing, to wear the 
devil’s gold ring
he who begins many things, fi nishes but 
few
if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth doing 
well
if you want a thing done well, do it 
yourself
little things please little minds
a mind is a terrible thing to waste
the more things change, the more they 
stay the same
never do things by halves
the only thing we have to fear is fear 
itself
sin, sorrow, and work are the things that 
men can’t shirk
take things as they come
there’s no such thing as a free lunch
there’s no such thing as bad weather, only 
the wrong clothes
a thing of beauty is a joy forever
things come in threes
things past cannot be recalled
a thing you don’t want is dear at any 
price
three things are not to be trusted: a cow’s 
horn, a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s hoof
when things are at the worst they begin 
to mend
winning isn’t everything, it’s the only 
thing
worse things happen at sea
the worth of a thing is what it will bring
you can have too much of a good thing
you can’t be all things to all men
think  every man thinks his own geese 
swans
evil be to him who thinks it
great minds think alike
he that drinks beer, thinks beer
think all you speak, but speak not all you 
think
think before you speak
thinking is very far from knowing
think much, speak little, and write less
young folks think old folks to be fools, 
but old folks know young folks to be 
fools
third  the third time is the charm
while two dogs are fi ghting for a bone, a 
third runs away with it
thirsty  dig the well before you are 
thirsty
thorn  beware of an oak, it draws the 
stroke; avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; 
creep under the thorn, it can save you 
from harm
there’s no rose without a thorn
thought  action without thought is like 
shooting without aim
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love
Index by Key Word
428
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd428   428 1/29/07   5:24:18 PM
one courageous thought will put to fl ight 
a host of troubles
second thoughts are best
thought is free
the wish is father to the thought
thousand  the buyer needs a thousand 
eyes, the seller wants but one
the coward dies a thousand deaths, the 
brave but one See cowards die many 
times before their death
a journey of a thousand miles begins with 
one step
one picture is worth ten thousand words
thread  the thread breaks where it is 
weakest
threaten  threatened men live long
three  better three hours too soon than 
a minute too late See it’s better to be an 
hour too early than a minute too late
fi sh and guests stink after three days
from shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves is only 
three generations
it takes three generations to make a 
gentleman
one for sorrow; two for mirth; three for a 
wedding; four for a birth
one hour’s sleep before midnight is worth 
three after See one hour’s sleep before 
midnight is worth two after
things come in threes
the three doctors Diet, Quiet, and Tem-
perance are the best physicians See the 
best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, 
and Dr. Merryman
three may keep a secret, if two of them 
are dead
three moves are as bad as a fi re
three things are not to be trusted: a cow’s 
horn, a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s hoof
three times a bridesmaid, never a bride 
See always a bridesmaid, never a bride
two boys are half a boy, and three boys are 
no boy at all
two’s company, three’s a crowd
thrift  most people consider thrift a fi ne 
virtue in ancestors
thrift is a great revenue
thrive  fi rst thrive and then wive
he that will thrive must fi rst ask his wife
if you want to live and thrive, let the spi-
der run alive
ill-gotten goods never thrive
throw  charity is not a bone you throw to 
a dog but a bone you share with a dog
don’t throw away your dirty water until 
you get clean
don’t throw good money after bad
don’t throw out the baby with the bath-
water
don’t throw pearls to swine See don’t cast 
your pearls before swine
people who live in glass houses shouldn’t 
throw stones
throw dirt enough, and some will stick
throw out a sprat to catch a mackerel
whosoever draws his sword against the 
prince must throw the scabbard away
Thursday  Thursday’s child has far to go
thyself  know thyself
physician, heal thyself
tide  a rising tide lifts all boats
there’s a tide in the affairs of man
time and tide wait for no man
tiger  he who rides a tiger is afraid to 
dismount
timber  knowledge and timber shouldn’t 
be much used until they are seasoned
time  accusing the times is but excusing 
ourselves
be happy while you’re living, for you’re a 
long time dead
better luck next time
cowards die many times before their death
footprints on the sands of time are not 
made by sitting down
he that waits for dead men’s shoes may go 
a long time barefoot See it’s ill waiting 
for dead men’s shoes
Index by Key Word
429
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd429   429 1/29/07   5:24:18 PM
life is short and time is swift
moving three times is as bad as a fi re See 
three moves are as bad as a fi re
never is a long time
one step at a time
other times, other manners
parsley seed goes nine times to the devil
procrastination is the thief of time
a stitch in time saves nine
take time by the forelock
there’s a fi rst time for everything
there’s a season and a time for every 
purpose under the heaven See to every-
thing there is a season
there’s a time and place for everything
there’s a time to speak and a time to be 
silent
there’s no time like the present
the third time is the charm
three times a bridesmaid, never a bride 
See always a bridesmaid, never a bride
time and tide wait for no man
time ends all things
time fl ies
time hangs heavy on idle hands
time is a great healer
time is money
time is the rider that breaks youth
time lost cannot be recalled
times change, and we with time
time will tell
time works wonders
timing is everything
work expands so as to fi ll the time avail-
able for its completion
you can fool some of the people all of 
the time, and all of the people some of 
the time, but you can’t fool all of the 
people all of the time
you can’t be in two places at the same time 
See one cannot be in two places at once
tinker  if ifs and ans were pots and pans, 
there’d be no work for tinkers
today  never put off until tomorrow 
what you can do today
today is yesterday’s tomorrow
today you, tomorrow me
together  the family that prays together 
stays together
told  See tell
tomorrow  eat, drink, and be merry, for 
tomorrow we die
jam tomorrow and jam yesterday, but 
never jam today
never put off until tomorrow what you 
can do today
today is yesterday’s tomorrow
today you, tomorrow me
tomorrow is another day
tomorrow never comes
tongue  the devil makes his Christmas 
pies of lawyers’ tongues and clerks’ 
fi ngers
a still tongue makes a wise head
the tongue always returns to the sore tooth
the tongue is not steel, but it cuts
too  one enemy is too much
you can have too much of a good thing
tool  a bad workman quarrels with his 
tools
cards are the devil’s tools
it’s ill jesting with edged tools
toot  toot your own horn lest the same 
be never tooted
tooth  an eye for an eye, and a tooth 
for a tooth
the gods send nuts to those who have no 
teeth
if you can’t bite, never show your 
teeth
three things are not to be trusted: a cow’s 
horn, a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s hoof
the tongue always returns to the sore 
tooth
top  cream always comes to the top
there’s always room at the top
Index by Key Word
430
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd430   430 1/29/07   5:24:19 PM
total  be kind to your friends; if it 
weren’t for them, you would be a total 
stranger
touch  he that touches pitch shall be 
defi led
touchstone  calamity is the touchstone 
of a brave mind
tough  when the going gets tough, the 
tough get going
town  God made the country and man 
made the town
trade  every man to his trade
a jack of all trades is master of none
there are tricks in every trade
trade follows the fl ag
two of a trade never agree
transplant  old trees can’t be trans-
planted See you can’t shift an old tree 
without it dying
trash  one man’s trash is another man’s 
treasure
travel  an army travels on its stomach 
See an army marches on its stomach
bad news travels fast
he travels fastest who travels alone
it’s better to travel hopefully than to 
arrive
travel broadens the mind
travel east and travel west, a man’s own 
home is still the best See east, west, 
home’s best
traveler  a traveler may lie with author-
ity
tread  fools rush in where angels fear 
to tread
treasure  one man’s trash is another 
man’s treasure
tree  all arts are one, all branches on one 
tree See all arts are brothers, each is a 
light to the other
the apple never falls far from the tree
as a tree falls, so shall it lie
as the twig is bent, so is the tree inclined
great trees keep down little ones
he that would eat the fruit must climb 
the tree
the higher the tree, the sweeter the plum
money doesn’t grow on trees
no tree takes so deep a root as prejudice
the tree is known by its fruit
you can’t shift an old tree without it 
dying
trick  there are tricks in every trade
you can’t teach an old dog new tricks
trifl e  trifl es make perfection, and per-
fection is no trifl e
trot  need makes the old wife trot
trouble  a clear conscience can bear any 
trouble
don’t meet troubles halfway
he that has a choice has trouble
it’s good fi shing in troubled waters
never trouble trouble till trouble troubles 
you
one courageous thought will put to fl ight 
a host of troubles
troubles never come singly See misfor-
tunes never come singly
a trouble shared is a trouble halved
worry is interest paid on trouble before 
it falls due
trout  you must lose a fl y to catch a 
trout See throw out a sprat to catch a 
mackerel
true  the course of true love never did 
run smooth
many a true word is spoken in jest
morning dreams come true
true blue will never stain
what everybody says must be true
what’s new cannot be true
trumpeter  a dry cough is the trumpeter 
of death
trust  fi rst try and then trust
put your trust in God, and keep your 
powder dry
Index by Key Word
431
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd431   431 1/29/07   5:24:19 PM
Index by Key Word
432
three things are not to be trusted: a cow’s 
horn, a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s hoof
trust everybody, but cut the cards
trust not a new friend nor an old enemy
trust not one night’s ice
truth  beauty is truth, truth beauty
children and fools speak the truth
the greater the truth, the greater the 
libel
half the truth is often a whole lie
a liar is not believed when he tells the 
truth
a lie can go around the world and back again 
while the truth is lacing up its boots
out of the mouths of babes and sucklings 
come great truths
tell the truth and shame the devil
there’s truth in wine
the truth hurts
truth is stranger than fi ction
truth is the fi rst casualty of war
truth is truth to the end of the reckoning
truth lies at the bottom of a well
truth will out
try  fi rst try and then trust
if at fi rst you don’t succeed, try, try again 
you never know what you can do until 
you try
tub  every tub must stand on its own 
bottom
Tuesday  Tuesday’s child is full of grace
tug  when Greek meets Greek, then 
comes the tug of war
tune  America is a tune: it must be sung 
together
a dripping June sets all in tune
he that lives in hope dances to an ill tune
he who pays the piper calls the tune
there’s many a good tune played on an 
old fi ddle
why should the devil have all the best 
tunes?
turn  a bad penny always turns up
clergymen’s sons always turn out badly
even a worm will turn
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love
it’s a long road that has no turning
one good turn deserves another
a soft answer turns away wrath 
the tongue ever turns to the aching tooth 
See the tongue always returns to the 
sore tooth
turnabout  turnabout is fair play
turnip  you can’t get blood from a turnip 
See you can’t get blood from a stone
twain  East is East and West is West and 
never the twain shall meet
twelve  it’s not spring until you can 
plant your foot upon twelve daisies
twice  don’t make the same mistake 
twice
fool me once, shame on you; fool me 
twice, shame on me
a good tale is not the worse for being 
told twice
he gives twice who gives quickly
lightning never strikes twice in the same 
place
once bitten, twice shy
once burned, twice shy
opportunity never knocks twice at any 
man’s door See opportunity knocks 
but once
think twice before you speak See think 
before you speak
you can’t step twice into the same river
twig  as the twig is bent, so is the tree 
inclined
two  better one house spoiled than two
between two stools one falls to the ground
a bird in the hand is worth two in the 
bush
choose the lesser of two evils
a dwarf on a giant’s shoulders sees further 
of the two
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd432   432 1/29/07   5:24:19 PM
Index by Key Word
433
four eyes see more than two
an hour in the morning is worth two in 
the evening
if two ride on a horse, one must ride 
behind
if you run after two hares, you will catch 
neither
it takes two to make a bargain
it takes two to make a quarrel
no man can serve two masters
one cannot be in two places at once
one for sorrow; two for mirth; three for a 
wedding; four for a birth
one hour’s sleep before midnight is worth 
two after
stand on your own two feet
there are two sides to every question
three may keep a secret, if two of them 
are dead
two and two make four
two boys are half a boy, and three boys are 
no boy at all
two heads are better than one
two of a trade never agree
two’s company, three’s a crowd
two tailors go to a man See nine tailors 
make a man
two wrongs don’t make a right
while two dogs are fi ghting for a bone, a 
third runs away with it
you must take two bears to live with 
you—bear and forbear See bear and 
forbear
it takes two to tango
one volunteer is worth two pressed men
unbelieving  believing has a core of 
unbelieving
uncertain  children are certain cares, 
but uncertain comforts
underestimate  nobody ever went 
broke underestimating the intelligence 
of the American people
undo  what’s done cannot be undone
uneasy  uneasy lies the head that wears 
a crown
unemployed  mind unemployed is mind 
unenjoyed
unenjoyed  mind unemployed is mind 
unenjoyed
unexpected  the unexpected always 
happens
unforeseen  nothing is certain but the 
unforeseen
union  union is strength
unite  united we stand, divided we fall
unity  in unity there is strength See 
union is strength 
unlikely  pigs may fl y, but they are very 
unlikely birds See if a pig had wings, it 
might fl y
unlucky  lucky at cards, unlucky in love
unpunished  no good deed goes unpun-
ished
unscramble  you can’t unscramble eggs
unsent  sorrow comes unsent for
unto  do unto others as you would have 
them do unto you
render unto Caesar that which is Caesar’s
up  prejudice is being down on what we 
are not up on
what goes up must come down
upright  an empty sack cannot stand 
upright
use  ask advice, but use your own com-
mon sense
it’s no use crying over spilled milk
keep a thing seven years and you’ll fi nd 
a use for it
knowledge and timber shouldn’t be much 
used until they are seasoned
the only difference between stumbling 
blocks and stepping-stones is the way 
you use them
use brains not brawn See wisdom goes 
beyond strength
the used key is always bright
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd433   433 1/29/07   5:24:19 PM
Index by Key Word
434
use legs and have legs
use your head and save your feet See let 
your head save your heels
vacuum  nature abhors a vacuum
vain  in vain the net is spread in the sight 
of the bird
nature does nothing in vain
valet  no man is a hero to his valet
valor  discretion is the better part of valor
valuable  a good reputation is more 
valuable than money
value  the cow knows not the value of 
her tail till she has lost it
health is not valued till sickness comes
variety  variety is the spice of life
varlet  an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, 
though they be clad in silk or scarlet
venture  great boats may venture more, 
but little boats should keep near shore 
See little boats should stay close to shore
nothing ventured, nothing gained
Venus  men are from Mars, women are 
from Venus
verbum  verbum sapienti sat est See a word 
to the wise is suffi cient
veritas  in vino veritas See there’s truth 
in wine 
vessel  empty vessels make the most 
sound
vicar  the devil gets up to the belfry by 
the vicar’s skirts
the vicar of Bray will be vicar of Bray still
vicariously  gossip is vice enjoyed vicar-
iously
vice  gossip is vice enjoyed vicariously
idleness is the mother of all the vices See 
idleness is the root of all evil
prosperity discovers vice; adversity, virtue
victor  to the victor belong the spoils
victory  in war there is no substitute 
for victory
victory has a hundred fathers and defeat is 
an orphan See success has many fathers, 
while failure is an orphan
view  distance lends enchantment to the 
view
vigilance  the price of liberty is eternal 
vigilance
village  better be fi rst in a village than 
second at Rome
it takes a village to raise a child
vincit  amor vincit omnia See love con-
quers all
vinegar  from the sweetest wine, the 
tartest vinegar
oil and vinegar will not mix See oil and 
water do not mix
you can catch more fl ies with honey than 
with vinegar
vino  in vino veritas See there’s truth in 
wine
virtue  make a virtue of necessity
most people consider thrift a fi ne virtue 
in ancestors
patience is a virtue
prosperity discovers vice; adversity, virtue
virtue is its own reward
vision  where there’s no vision, the peo-
ple perish
visit  short visits make long friends
visitor  fi sh and visitors smell in three 
days See fi sh and guests stink after 
three days
vita  ars longa, vita brevis See art is long 
and life is short
voice  the voice of the people is the 
voice of God
voluntary  ignorance is a voluntary mis-
fortune
volunteer  one volunteer is worth two 
pressed men
vomit  the dog always returns to his 
vomit
vox  vox populi, vox Dei See the voice of 
the people is the voice of God
wag  it’s merry in hall when beards 
wag all
wagon  hitch your wagon to a star
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd434   434 1/29/07   5:24:19 PM
Index by Key Word
435
wait  all things come to those who wait
it’s ill waiting for dead men’s shoes
they also serve who only stand and wait
time and tide wait for no man
walk  after dinner rest awhile, after sup-
per walk a mile
don’t judge a man until you have walked a 
mile in his boots
don’t talk the talk if you can’t walk the 
walk
if it looks like a duck, walks like a duck, 
and quacks like a duck, it’s a duck
we must learn to walk before we can run
wall  a church is God between four walls
don’t tear down a wall unless you are 
sure why it was put up See don’t take 
down a fence unless you are sure why 
it was put up
stone walls do not a prison make 
walls have ears
the weakest go to the wall
a white wall is the fool’s writing paper
walnut  walnuts and pears you plant for 
your heirs
want  for want of a nail the shoe was 
lost, for want of a shoe the horse was 
lost, and for want of a horse the rider 
was lost
haste makes waste, and waste makes 
want, and want makes strife between a 
good man and his wife See haste makes 
waste
he that has a full purse never wanted a 
friend
if you want a thing done well, do it 
yourself
if you want peace, prepare for war
if you want something done, ask a busy 
person
if you want to live and thrive, let the spi-
der run alive
the more you get, the more you want
see a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lie, 
you’ll want a pin before you die See see 
a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll 
have good luck; see a pin and let it lay, 
bad luck you’ll have all the day
a thing you don’t want is dear at any 
price
waste not, want not
willful waste makes woeful want
wanton  wanton kittens make sober cats
war  all’s fair in love and war
councils of war never fi ght
if you want peace, prepare for war
in war there is no substitute for victory
it’s better to lose the battle and win the 
war
truth is the fi rst casualty of war
war is hell
war is too important to be left to the 
generals
war will cease when men refuse to fi ght
when Greek meets Greek, then comes the 
tug of war
who has land has war
warm  better a little fi re to warm us 
than a big one to burn us
cold hands, warm heart
heated arguments do not warm the fi re-
side See the only thing a heated argu-
ment ever produced is coolness
warn  red sky at night, sailor’s delight; 
red sky in the morning, sailors take 
warning
wash  don’t wash your dirty linen in 
public
it’ll all come out in the wash
one hand washes the other
wishes won’t wash dishes
waste  haste makes waste
a mind is a terrible thing to waste
save at the spigot and waste at the bung 
See spare at the spigot, and let out the 
bunghole
waste not, want not
willful waste makes woeful want
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd435   435 1/29/07   5:24:19 PM
Index by Key Word
436
watch  don’t set a wolf to watch the 
sheep See don’t let the fox guard the 
henhouse
a watched pot never boils 
wear your learning like your watch, in a 
private pocket
water  blood is thicker than water
dirty water will quench fi re
don’t go near the water until you learn 
how to swim
don’t throw away your dirty water until 
you get clean
fi re and water are good servants but bad 
masters See fi re is a good servant but a 
bad master
it’s good fi shing in troubled waters
little drops of water, little grains of sand, 
make a mighty ocean and a pleasant 
land
the mill cannot grind with the water that 
is past
much water goes by the mill that the 
miller knows not of
oil and water do not mix
revolutions are not made with rose water
still waters run deep
stolen waters are sweet
water is the only drink for a wise man
water seeks its own level
you can lead a horse to water, but you 
can’t make him drink
you never miss the water till the well 
runs dry
way  be nice to people on your way 
up because you’ll meet them on your 
way down
the best way to get even is to forget
God moves in a mysterious way
the longest way around is the shortest 
way home
love will fi nd a way
straws show which way the wind blows
there are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream
there’s more than one way to skin a cat
the way to a man’s heart is through his 
stomach
the way to be safe is never to feel secure 
See he that is too secure is not safe
where there’s a will there’s a way
a willful man must have his way
you can’t have it both ways
weak  a chain is no stronger than its 
weakest link
the spirit is willing but the fl esh is weak
the thread breaks where it is weakest
the weakest go to the wall
wealth  health is wealth
wealth makes many friends
wisdom is better than wealth See wisdom 
is better than rubies
wealthy  early to bed and early to rise, 
makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise
weapon  a bayonet is a weapon with a 
worker at each end
wear  better to wear out than to rust out
boys seldom make passes for girls who 
wear glasses 
the church is an anvil which has worn out 
many hammers
constant dropping wears away a stone
if the shoe fi ts, wear it
uneasy lies the head that wears a crown
wear your learning like your watch, in a 
private pocket
wearer  the wearer best knows where 
the shoe pinches
weary  be the day weary or be the day 
long, at last it ringeth to evensong
there’s no rest for the weary
weather  everybody talks about the 
weather, but nobody does anything 
about it
the good seaman is known in bad weather
it’s always fair weather when good friends 
get together
Robin Hood could brave all weathers but 
a thaw wind
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd436   436 1/29/07   5:24:19 PM
Index by Key Word
437
there’s no such thing as bad weather, only 
the wrong clothes
weave  what a tangled web we weave 
when fi rst we practice to deceive
web  what a tangled web we weave 
when fi rst we practice to deceive
wedding  one for sorrow; two for 
mirth
three for a wedding; four for a birth
one wedding brings another
wedlock  wedlock is a padlock
Wednesday  Wednesday’s child is full 
of woe
weed  ill weeds grow apace
one year’s seeding makes seven years’ 
weeding
week  if you would be happy for a 
week take a wife; if you would be 
happy for a month kill a pig; but if 
you would be happy all your life plant 
a garden
weep  laugh and the world laughs with 
you, weep and you weep alone
the winners laugh, the losers weep See let 
them laugh that win
weeper  fi nders keepers, losers weep-
ers
welcome  a constant guest is never wel-
come
welcome is the best cheer
when all fruit fails, welcome haws
well (adj., adv.)  all’s well that ends 
well
the devil was sick, the devil a saint would 
be; the devil was well, the devil a saint 
was he
everybody speaks well of the bridge that 
carries him over See praise the bridge 
that carries you over
he lives long who lives well
hope well and have well See hope and 
have
if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth doing 
well
if you want a thing done well, do it your-
self
if you would be well served, serve your-
self
it’s as well to know which way the wind 
blows See straws show which way the 
wind blows
leave well enough alone
pay beforehand was never well served
spare well and have to spend
speak well of the dead See never speak ill 
of the dead
well begun is half done
well (n.)  dig the well before you are 
thirsty
the pitcher will go to the well once too 
often
truth lies at the bottom of a well
you never miss the water till the well 
runs dry
west  east, west, home’s best
East is East and West is West and never the 
twain shall meet
wet  the cat would eat fi sh, but would 
not wet her feet
sow dry and set wet
a wet May brings plenty of hay
what  it’s not what you know, but who 
you know
it’s not what you say, but how you say it
what’s in a name?
what will be, will be
what you see is what you get
wheel  the squeaky wheel gets the grease
the wheel comes full circle
the wheel of fortune is forever in motion
the world runs on wheels
whelp  the hasty bitch bringeth forth 
blind whelps
wherefore  every why has its wherefore
whirlwind  they that sow the wind shall 
reap the whirlwind
whiskey  whiskey and gasoline don’t mix
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd437   437 1/29/07   5:24:19 PM
Index by Key Word
438
whistle  it’s a poor dog that’s not worth 
whistling for
a whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men
white  a white wall is the fool’s writing 
paper
who  it’s not what you know, but who 
you know
whole  the half is better than the whole
half the truth is often a whole lie
you can’t please the whole world and 
his wife See you can’t please every-
body
why  every why has its wherefore
wicked  there’s no peace for the wicked
there’s no rest for the wicked See there’s 
no rest for the weary
wide  keep your eyes wide open before 
marriage, half shut afterward
wife  a blind man’s wife needs no paint
Caesar’s wife must be above suspicion
a deaf husband and a blind wife are always 
a happy couple
a good husband makes a good wife
haste makes waste, and waste makes 
want, and want makes strife between a 
good man and his wife See haste makes 
waste
he that has a wife and children has given 
hostages to fortune
he that will thrive must fi rst ask his wife
if you would be happy for a week take 
a wife; if you would be happy for a 
month kill a pig; but if you would be 
happy all your life plant a garden
need makes the old wife trot
a son is a son till he gets him a wife, a 
daughter’s a daughter all of her life
you can’t please the whole world and his 
wife See you can’t please everybody
will  a fat kitchen makes a lean will
he that complies against his will is of his 
own opinion still
he that will not when he may, when he 
will he may have nay
he who wills the end, wills the means
nothing is impossible to a willing heart
the spirit is willing but the fl esh is weak
take the will for the deed
there are none so blind as those who will 
not see
there are none so deaf as those who will 
not hear
what will be, will be
where there’s a will there’s a way
the willing horse carries the load
willful  a willful man must have his way
willful waste makes woeful want
win  cheaters never win and winners 
never cheat See cheaters never prosper
faint heart never won fair lady
a good name is sooner lost than won
heads I win, tails you lose
he that would the daughter win, must 
with the mother fi rst begin 
it’s better to lose the battle and win the war
it’s not whether you win or lose, but how 
you play the game
let them laugh that win
light winnings make heavy purses See light 
gains make heavy purses
nothing venture, nothing win See nothing 
ventured, nothing gained
slow and steady wins the race
a winner never quits, and a quitter never 
wins
winning isn’t everything, it’s the only thing
you can’t win ’em all
you win some, you lose some
wind  God tempers the wind to the 
shorn lamb
hoist your sail when the wind is fair
if wind blows on you through a hole, say 
your prayers and mind your soul
it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any 
good
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd438   438 1/29/07   5:24:19 PM
Index by Key Word
439
March winds and April showers always 
bring May fl owers See April showers 
bring May fl owers
the north wind doth blow and we shall 
have snow
one for wind and one for crow, one to 
die and one to grow See one for the 
mouse, one for the crow, one to rot, 
one to grow
a reed before the wind lives on, while 
mighty oaks do fall
Robin Hood could brave all weathers but 
a thaw wind
straws show which way the wind blows
they that sow the wind shall reap the 
whirlwind
when the wind is in the east, ’tis neither 
good for man nor beast
window  drive nature out of the door 
and it will return by the window 
See you can drive out nature with a 
pitchfork but she keeps on coming 
back
the eyes are the windows of the soul See 
the eyes are the mirrors of the soul
a house without books is like a room 
without windows
when poverty comes in at the door, love 
fl ies out of the window
wine  from the sweetest wine, the tart-
est vinegar
good wine needs no bush
old friends and old wine are best
there’s truth in wine
when the wine is in, the wit is out
wine has drowned more men than the sea
you can’t put new wine in old bottles
wing  a bird never fl ew on one wing
fear lends wings
if a pig had wings, it might fl y
the mother of mischief is no bigger than a 
midge’s wing
riches have wings
wink  a nod’s as good as a wink to a 
blind horse
wink at small faults
winner   cheaters never win and win-
ners never cheat See cheaters never 
prosper
a winner never quits, and a quitter never 
wins
the winners laugh, the losers weep See let 
them laugh that win
winter  a green winter makes a fat 
churchyard
one swallow makes not a spring, nor one 
woodchuck a winter See one swallow 
does not make a summer
the rich man has his ice in the summer and 
the poor man gets his in the winter
winter fi nds out what summer lays up
you never know a man until you bed with 
him a winter and summer See you never 
know a man until you live with him
wisdom  experience is the mother of 
wisdom
from the mouths of babes come words of 
wisdom See out of the mouths of babes 
and sucklings come great truths
knowledge and wisdom are far from 
being one
wisdom goes beyond strength
wisdom is better than rubies
with age comes wisdom
wise  early to bed and early to rise, 
makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise
a fool may give a wise man counsel
fools ask questions that wise men cannot 
answer
fools build houses and wise men live in 
them
honest men marry quickly, wise men not 
at all
it’s a wise child that knows its own father
it’s better to be happy than wise
it’s easy to be wise after the event
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd439   439 1/29/07   5:24:20 PM
Index by Key Word
440
one cannot love and be wise
penny wise and pound foolish
a still tongue makes a wise head
water is the only drink for a wise man
where ignorance is bliss, ’tis folly to be 
wise See ignorance is bliss
a wise lawyer never goes to law himself
a wise man changes his mind, but a fool 
never does
a wise man is never less alone than when 
alone
wise men learn by other men’s mistakes, 
fools by their own See learn from the 
mistakes of others
a word to the wise is suffi cient
wisely  both poverty and prosperity 
come from spending money—pros-
perity from spending it wisely
wiser  the older the wiser
wish  don’t wish too hard
you might just get what you wished for
he who would wish to thrive, must let 
spiders run alive See if you want to live 
and thrive, let the spider run alive
if wishes were horses, beggars would 
ride
wishes won’t wash dishes
the wish is father to the thought
wit  brevity is the soul of wit
an ounce of discretion is worth a pound 
of wit
when the wine is in, the wit is out
wive  fi rst thrive and then wive
hanging and wiving go by destiny
woe  Wednesday’s child is full of woe
woeful  willful waste makes woeful want
wolf  don’t set a wolf to watch the 
sheep See don’t let the fox guard the 
henhouse
a growing youth has a wolf in his stom-
ach
hunger drives the wolf out of the wood
it’s a foolish sheep that makes the wolf his 
confessor
when the wolf comes in at the door, love 
creeps out of the window See when 
poverty comes in at the door, love fl ies 
out of the window
woman  behind every great man there is 
a great woman
hell hath no fury like a woman scorned
a man is as old as he feels, and a woman as 
old as she looks
men are from Mars, women are from 
Venus
men make houses, women make homes
never choose your women or linen by 
candlelight
patience is a virtue, catch it if you can: 
seldom in a woman and never in a man 
See patience is a virtue
six hours’ sleep for a man, seven for a 
woman, and eight for a fool
a whistling woman and a crowing hen are 
neither fi t for God nor men
a woman’s work is never done
won  See win
wonder  time works wonders
a wonder lasts but nine days
wonders will never cease!
woo  happy’s the wooing that’s not long 
a-doing
wood  don’t shout until you are out of 
the woods
fi elds have eyes and woods have ears
hunger drives the wolf out of the wood
touch wood
woodchuck  one swallow makes not a 
spring, nor one woodchuck a winter 
See one swallow does not make a 
summer
wool   many go out for wool and come 
home shorn
much cry and little wool
word  actions speak louder than words
all words are pegs to hang ideas on
deeds, not words
deeds are fruits, words are but leaves
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd440   440 1/29/07   5:24:20 PM
Index by Key Word
441
few words are best
fi ne words butter no parsnips
from the mouths of babes come words of 
wisdom See out of the mouths of babes 
and sucklings come great truths
hard words break no bones
a man’s word is as good as his bond
many a true word is spoken in jest
one picture is worth ten thousand 
words
sticks and stones may break my bones, but 
words will never hurt me See sticks and 
stones may break my bones but names 
will never hurt me
a word spoken is past recalling
a word to the wise is suffi cient
work  all work and no play makes Jack 
a dull boy
a change of work is a rest See a change is 
as good as a rest
the day is short and the work is long
the devil fi nds work for idle hands to do
the end crowns the work
the eye of a master does more work than 
both his hands
fools and children should never see half-
done work
hell is full of good meanings, but heaven is 
full of good works See the road to hell 
is paved with good intentions
he who does not work, neither should 
he eat
if ifs and ans were pots and pans, there’d 
be no work for tinkers
it’s all in a day’s work
it’s not work that kills, but worry
many hands make light work
never work with children or animals
the only place where success comes before 
work is in a dictionary
Saturday’s child works hard for its living
sin, sorrow, and work are the things that 
men can’t shirk
time works wonders
a woman’s work is never done 
work before play
work expands so as to fi ll the time avail-
able for its completion
work never hurt anybody
worker  a bayonet is a weapon with a 
worker at each end
workman  a bad workman quarrels with 
his tools
workshop  an idle brain is the devil’s 
workshop
world  all’s for the best in the best of all 
possible worlds
all the world’s a stage
better be out of the world than out of 
the fashion
blind chance sweeps the world along
God’s in his heaven; all’s right with the 
world
the hand that rocks the cradle rules the 
world
it’s a small world
it’s not the end of the world
it takes all kinds of people to make a world
laugh and the world laughs with you, 
weep and you weep alone
a lie can go around the world and back again 
while the truth is lacing up its boots
love makes the world go round
money makes the world go round
one half of the world doesn’t know how 
the other half lives
the world runs on wheels
you can’t please the whole world and his 
wife See you can’t please everybody
worm  the early bird catches the worm
even a worm will turn
worn  See wear
worry  action is worry’s worst enemy
don’t swallow the cow and worry with 
the tail See it’s idle to swallow the cow 
and choke on the tail
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd441   441 1/29/07   5:24:20 PM
Index by Key Word
442
it’s not work that kills, but worry
worry is interest paid on trouble before 
it falls due
worse  go farther and fare worse
a liar is worse than a thief
more haste, worse speed See more haste, 
less speed
the more you stir it, the worse it stinks
nothing so bad but it might have been 
worse
the remedy may be worse than the dis-
ease
too much of a good thing is worse than 
none at all See you can have too much 
of a good thing
worse things happen at sea
worst  action is worry’s worst enemy
every man is his own worst enemy
hope for the best and prepare for the 
worst
an old fool is the worst fool See there’s no 
fool like an old fool
when things are at the worst they begin 
to mend
the worst is yet to come
worth  a bird in the hand is worth two 
in the bush
don’t spoil the ship for half a penny’s 
worth of tar
the game is not worth the candle
an hour in the morning is worth two in 
the evening
if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth doing 
well
it’s a poor dog that’s not worth whistling 
for
one picture is worth ten thousand words
one volunteer is worth two pressed men
opportunities look for you when you are 
worth fi nding
opportunity never knocks for persons not 
worth a rap
the worth of a thing is what it will bring
worthy  the laborer is worthy of his hire
wound  time heals all wounds See time is 
a great healer
wrap  a man wrapped up in himself 
makes a very small bundle
wrath  hell knows no wrath like a 
woman scorned See hell hath no fury 
like a woman scorned
let not the sun go down on your wrath See 
never let the sun go down on your anger
a soft answer turns away wrath
wren  the robin and the wren are God’s 
cock and hen
write  he who would write and can’t 
write can surely review
think much, speak little, and write less
a white wall is the fool’s writing paper
wrong  he who is absent is always in 
the wrong
if anything can go wrong, it will
the king can do no wrong
there’s no such thing as bad weather, only 
the wrong clothes
two wrongs don’t make a right
yard  life is hard by the yard, but by the 
inch life’s a cinch
year  Christmas comes but once a year
the fi rst hundred years are the hardest
the fi rst seven years are the hardest
a fool can ask more questions in an hour 
than a wise man can answer in seven 
years See fools ask questions that wise 
men cannot answer
it’ll all be the same in a hundred years
keep a thing seven years and you’ll fi nd 
a use for it
one year’s seeding makes seven years’ 
weeding
there are no birds in last year’s nest
years know more than books
you should know a man seven years 
before you stir his fi re
yesterday  today is yesterday’s tomorrow 
yesterday will not be called again
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd442   442 1/29/07   5:24:20 PM
Index by Key Word
443
yet  the best is yet to be
the worst is yet to come
you  today you, tomorrow me
young  better be an old man’s darling 
than a young man’s slave
the good die young
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love
spare when you’re young and spend when 
you’re old
whom the gods love die young
you can’t put an old head on young 
shoulders
a young barber and an old physician
the young cock crows as he heard the 
old one
young folks think old folks to be fools, 
but old folks know young folks to be 
fools
a young man married is a young man 
marred
young men forgive, old men never See 
youth and old age will never agree
young men may die, but old men must die
a young physician fattens the churchyard 
See a young barber and an old physician
young saint, old devil
you’re only young once
yours  what’s yours is mine, and what’s 
mine is my own
youth  a growing youth has a wolf in his 
stomach
an idle youth, a needy age
youth and old age will never agree
zeal  zeal without knowledge is a run-
away horse
320-443_DictProverbs_2e_BM1.indd443   443 1/29/07   5:24:20 PM
444
In this index the proverbs are grouped 
together under thematic headings. Note 
that these headings relate to the meaning 
of the proverb, not the words it contains. 
“Give a dog a bad name and hang him” is 
not about dogs, so it is not listed under 
animals, but under its metaphorical 
themes of defamation and reputation. 
Similarly, “It never rains but it pours” 
is under misfortune, not weather. The 
themes are listed at the beginning for 
quick reference.
In d e x  b y  T h e m e
absence
acceptance
accumulation
action (See also saying and doing)
administration
adversity
advice
Africa
age
aggression
agriculture See gardening
alcohol See drinking
ambition
America
anger
animals
anticipation
anxiety See worry
apology
appearance
appreciation
arguing See confl ict
armed forces
arts
associates
authority (See also power)
bad people (See also wrongdoing)
bad things (See also good and bad)
barriers
beauty
beginning (See also raw material)
behavior
belief
betrayal
birds See animals
birthplace
bluntness
boasting
boldness (See also courage)
books
borrowing (See also debt)
bribery
business
buying and selling
calendar
calm
capture
carefulness
caution
certainty See uncertainty
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd444   444 1/29/07   5:53:04 PM
chance
change (See also reform)
changelessness
character
charity
cheerfulness
children (See also parents and children)
choice (See also indecision)
Christianity See religion
church See religion
circumstance
class
clothes See dress
coercion
coincidence
commerce See business
common sense
company (See also associates)
complaining
compromise
concealment
conciseness
confession
confl ict
conformity
conscience
consequence
contentment (See also happiness; satis-
faction)
conviviality
cooperation
corruption (See also bribery)
courage
courtesy
courtship
cowardice
credit
crime See wrongdoing
crisis
criticism
curiosity See questions
customs
danger (See also risk)
days
death (See also premature death)
debt (See also borrowing)
deceit See lies
deception
defamation
delay (See also lateness; procrastination)
desire (See also getting what you want)
despair
destiny
destruction
deterioration
determination
difference
diffi culty
diligence See industry
discipline
discontent
discretion (See also tact)
disgrace
disillusion
disloyalty
disobedience
disrespect See respect
distance
disunity
downfall
drawbacks (See also good and bad)
dreams
dress
drinking
earliness (See also promptness)
easiness
eating
eavesdropping
education
effi ciency
effort
embarrassment
ending
endurance
enemies
England
Index by Theme
445
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd445   445 1/29/07   5:53:04 PM
entertaining
envy
equality
escape
evil See bad things
exaggeration
example
excellence
excess
exchange
excuses
exercise
expectation
expediency
experience
expertise
exploitation
extravagance (See also spending)
extremes
failure
fairness
fame
familiarity
family (See also heredity; parents and 
children)
fate See destiny
fear
feelings
festivals
fi ction
fi nding
fi rst impressions
fl attery
food See eating
foolishness
foresight
forethought
forgetting
forgiveness
freedom
friends
frugality (See also thrift)
futility
future
gambling
gardening
generosity (See also giving)
genius See intellect
getting what you want
giving (See also generosity)
giving up
God (See also providence; religion)
good and bad (See also drawbacks)
good intentions
good things (See also good and bad)
gossip (See also rumors)
gratitude
great and small (See also greatness; size; 
small things)
greatness
greed
guidance
guilt
gullibility
habit
happiness
harm
harmony
haste
health
help
heredity
hesitation See delay
hierarchy
hindsight
hints
history
home
honesty (See also truth)
hope (See also optimism)
hospitality See entertaining
human nature
humility (See also meekness)
hunger
hygiene
hypocrisy
Index by Theme
446
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd446   446 1/29/07   5:53:05 PM
ideas
idleness
ignorance
illusion
imitation
impatience See patience
imperfection
impossibility
improbability
improvement
inaction
incompetence
incompleteness
indecision (See also choice)
independence See self-reliance
industry
ineffi ciency
infl exibility
infl uence
inheritance
innovation
integrity
intellect
interference
jocularity
judgment
kindness
knowledge
lateness
laughter See cheerfulness; jocularity
law
laziness See idleness
leadership
learning See education; knowledge
lending
lies
life
living within your means
logic
loss (See also winning and losing)
love
loyalty
luck
lying See lies
marriage
meaning
mediocrity
meekness
memory
men (See also men and women)
men and women (See also men; women)
merit
merrymaking
misfortune
mistakes
moderation
modesty
money (See also payment; spending; 
wealth)
months See calendar
mortality
music
names
nature (See also human nature)
necessity
neglect
news
nobility
noise
noninterference
numbers
obedience
objectivity
observation
obstinacy
offense
old age See age
opinion
opportunity
oppression
optimism (See also hope)
options
order
overambitiousness
overconfi dence
overreaction
Index by Theme
447
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd447   447 1/29/07   5:53:05 PM
parents and children (See also children; 
family; heredity)
past (See also history)
patience
payment
peace
perfection
perseverance
persistence
pessimism
pity See sympathy
plans
pleasing people
pleasure
politics
positive thinking
possession
possibility
poverty
power
praise
prediction
prejudice
premature death
preparation
present
pride
privacy
problems
problem-solving
procrastination
professions
promises
promotion
promptness (See also earliness)
property
providence (See also God)
public opinion
publicity
punctuality See promptness
punishment
quarreling See confl ict
questions
raw material
reciprocity
reconciliation
recreation
reform
regret
religion (See also God)
relocation
remedies
repetition
replacement
reputation
resistance
resourcefulness
respect
response
responsibility
rest
retaliation (See also revenge)
retribution
revenge (See also retaliation)
revolution
reward
risk (See also danger)
rulers
rules
rumors (See also gossip)
ruthlessness
sacrifi ce
safety See security
sailing
satisfaction
saying and doing
seasons See calendar
secrecy
security
self-centeredness
self-harm
self-help
self-interest
selfi shness See self-interest
self-knowledge
selfl essness
self-preservation
self-reliance
Index by Theme
448
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd448   448 1/29/07   5:53:05 PM
Index by Theme
449
selling See buying and selling
sharing
sickness
silence
similarity
size (See also great and small; small 
things)
skepticism
sleep
slowness
small things (See also great and small; 
size)
social interaction
society
soldiers See armed forces
solitude
sorrow
spare time
speech See talking
spending (See also extravagance)
sportsmanship
storytelling
strangeness
strength
stress (See also worry)
style
subjectivity
success
suffering
suitability
superstition
surprise
surrender See giving up
sycophancy
sympathy
tact (See also discretion)
tactics
taking no notice
talent
talking (See also saying and doing; 
words)
taste
temptation
thoroughness
threats
thrift (See also frugality)
tidiness
time
timeliness
tolerance
towns
transience
travel
treachery (See also betrayal)
trees
triviality
trouble
truth (See also honesty)
uncertainty
unfairness
unity
upbringing
usefulness
value
vice
victory (See also winning and losing)
violence
virtue
waiting
war
warning
waste
ways and means
weakness
wealth (See also money)
weather
willingness
winning and losing (See also victory; 
loss)
wisdom
wishes See desire
women (See also men and women)
words (See also talking; writing)
work (See also industry)
workers
worry
worthlessness
writing
wrongdoing
youth See age; children; premature death
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd449   449 1/29/07   5:53:05 PM
absence
absence is the mother of disillusion; 
absence makes the heart grow fonder; 
he who is absent is always in the wrong; 
a little absence does much good; out of 
sight, out of mind; when the cat’s away, 
the mice will play
acceptance
if you don’t like it, you can lump it; it’s all 
in a day’s work; what can’t be cured must 
be endured
accumulation
if you don’t speculate, you can’t accumu-
late; little and often fi lls the purse; little 
drops of water, little grains of sand, make 
a mighty ocean and a pleasant land; little 
leaks sink the ship; little strokes fell great 
oaks; many a little makes a mickle
action  (See also saying and doing)
action is worry’s worst enemy; action 
without thought is like shooting without 
aim; fi sh or cut bait; footprints on the 
sands of time are not made by sitting 
down; it’s better to light one candle than 
curse the darkness; piss or get off the pot; 
shoot fi rst and ask questions afterward; 
the tree is known by its fruit; the used key 
is always bright
administration
business is like a car, it will not run by 
itself except downhill; that government is 
best which governs least; too many chiefs 
and not enough Indians; you can’t fi ght 
City Hall
adversity
adversity makes strange bedfellows; 
crosses are ladders that lead to heaven; the 
devil was sick, the devil a saint would be; 
the devil was well, the devil a saint was 
he; a dose of adversity is often as needful 
as a dose of medicine; a friend in need is 
a friend indeed; God makes the back to 
the burden; the good seaman is known in 
bad weather; life is no bed of roses; life 
isn’t all beer and skittles; life’s a bitch, and 
then you die; man’s extremity is God’s 
opportunity; prosperity discovers vice; 
adversity, virtue; the sharper the storm, 
the sooner it’s over; this, too, shall pass; 
we must eat a peck of dirt before we die
advice
ask advice, but use your own common 
sense; don’t teach your grandmother to 
suck eggs; a fool may give a wise man 
counsel; nothing is given so freely as 
advice
Africa
always something new out of Africa
age
age before beauty; better be an old man’s 
darling than a young man’s slave; a creak-
ing door hangs longest; don’t teach your 
grandmother to suck eggs; a fool at forty 
is a fool indeed; the gods send nuts to 
those who have no teeth; a growing youth 
has a wolf in his stomach; an idle youth, 
a needy age; it’s never too late to learn; 
knowledge and timber shouldn’t be much 
used until they are seasoned; late chil-
dren, early orphans; life begins at forty; a 
man is as old as he feels, and a woman as 
old as she looks; never send a boy to do a 
man’s job; the older the wiser; old friends 
and old wine are best; old soldiers never 
die; spare when you’re young and spend 
when you’re old; there’s many a good 
tune played on an old fi ddle; there’s no 
fool like an old fool; they that live longest 
Index by Theme
450
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd450   450 1/29/07   5:53:05 PM
see most; time is the rider that breaks 
youth; wanton kittens make sober cats; 
with age comes wisdom; you can’t catch 
old birds with chaff; you can’t put an old 
head on young shoulders; you can’t shift 
an old tree without it dying; you can’t 
teach an old dog new tricks; a young 
barber and an old physician; young folks 
think old folks to be fools, but old folks 
know young folks to be fools; young men 
may die, but old men must die; young 
saint, old devil; you’re only young once; 
youth and old age will never agree; youth 
must be served; youth will have its fl ing
aggression
the best defense is a good offense; a bully 
is always a coward; if you can’t bite, never 
show your teeth
agriculture  See gardening
alcohol  See drinking
ambition
every soldier has the baton of a fi eld-
marshal in his knapsack; hasty climbers 
have sudden falls; he who would climb 
the ladder must begin at the bottom; the 
higher the monkey climbs the more he 
shows his tail; the higher the tree, the 
sweeter the plum; hitch your wagon to a 
star; humble hearts have humble desires; 
many go out for wool and come home 
shorn; the sky’s the limit; there’s always 
room at the top
America
America is a tune: it must be sung 
together; the business of America is busi-
ness; good Americans, when they die, 
go to Paris; never sell America short; 
nobody ever went broke underestimating 
the intelligence of the American people; 
what’s good for General Motors is good 
for America
anger
anger improves nothing but the arch of a 
cat’s back; anger without power is folly; 
don’t get mad, get even; hell hath no fury 
like a woman scorned; a hungry man is an 
angry man; a little pot is soon hot; never let 
the sun go down on your anger; the only 
thing a heated argument ever produced is 
coolness; a soft answer turns away wrath
animals
a cat has nine lives; a dog is a man’s best 
friend; an elephant never forgets; if you 
want to live and thrive, let the spider 
run alive; never work with children or 
animals; one for sorrow; two for mirth; 
three for a wedding; four for a birth; the 
robin and the wren are God’s cock and 
hen; there’s nothing so good for the inside 
of a man as the outside of a horse; three 
things are not to be trusted: a cow’s horn, 
a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s hoof
anticipation
don’t count your chickens before they are 
hatched; don’t cross the bridge till you 
come to it; don’t cry before you’re hurt; 
don’t meet troubles halfway; don’t shout 
until you are out of the woods; don’t 
throw away your dirty water until you 
get clean; fi rst catch your hare; it’s not 
over till it’s over; let them laugh that win; 
never trouble trouble till trouble troubles 
you; the opera ain’t over till the fat lady 
sings; suffi cient unto the day is the evil 
thereof; worry is interest paid on trouble 
before it falls due
anxiety  See worry
Index by Theme
451
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd451   451 1/29/07   5:53:06 PM
apology
he who excuses himself accuses him-
self; never ask pardon before you are 
accused
appearance
all that glitters is not gold; an ape’s an ape, 
a varlet’s a varlet, though they be clad in 
silk or scarlet; appearances are deceiving; 
beauty and honesty seldom agree; beauty is 
only skin-deep; the best art conceals art; be 
what you would seem to be; a blind man’s 
wife needs no paint; blushing is a sign of 
grace; clothes don’t make the man; clothes 
make the man; the cowl does not make 
the monk; don’t judge a book by its cover; 
fancy passes beauty; fi ne feathers make 
fi ne birds; a good face is a letter of recom-
mendation; a good horse cannot be of a bad 
color; handsome is as handsome does; an 
honest look covereth many faults; if it looks 
like a duck, walks like a duck, and quacks 
like a duck, it’s a duck; judge not accord-
ing to appearances; the lion is not so fi erce 
as he is painted; a man is as old as he feels, 
and a woman as old as she looks; a merry 
heart makes a cheerful countenance; never 
choose your women or linen by candle-
light; the proof of the pudding is in the 
eating; there’s many a good cock come out 
of a tattered bag; the tree is known by its 
fruit; what you see is what you get
appreciation
blessings brighten as they take their fl ight; 
the cow knows not the value of her tail 
till she has lost it; don’t cast your pearls 
before swine; health is not valued till sick-
ness comes; if there were no clouds, we 
shouldn’t enjoy the sun; you never miss 
the water till the well runs dry
arguing  See confl ict
armed forces
an army marches on its stomach; every 
soldier has the baton of a fi eld-marshal 
in his knapsack; the fi rst duty of a soldier 
is obedience; old soldiers never die; war 
will cease when men refuse to fi ght
arts
all arts are brothers, each is a light to the 
other; art is long and life is short; art is 
power; the best art conceals art
associates
adversity makes strange bedfellows; birds 
of a feather fl ock together; Caesar’s wife 
must be above suspicion; evil communi-
cations corrupt good manners; he that 
touches pitch shall be defi led; he who 
sups with the devil should have a long 
spoon; hitch your wagon to a star; if you 
lie down with dogs, you’ll get up with 
fl eas; it’s not what you know, but who you 
know; like attracts like; love me, love my 
dog; a man is known by the company he 
keeps; politics makes strange bedfellows; 
the rotten apple spoils the barrel; the sun 
loses nothing by shining into a puddle; 
water seeks its own level; when you go 
to dance, take heed whom you take by 
the hand
authority  (See also power)
divide and conquer; kings have long arms; 
that government is best which governs 
least; too many chiefs and not enough 
Indians; when the cat’s away, the mice will 
play; you can’t fi ght City Hall
bad people  (See also wrongdoing)
a bad penny always turns up; the devil can 
cite scripture for his purpose; the devil 
looks after his own; the devil’s children 
have the devil’s luck; don’t let the fox 
Index by Theme
452
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd452   452 1/29/07   5:53:06 PM
guard the henhouse; an ill bird lays an ill 
egg; there’s a black sheep in every fl ock; 
when you go to dance, take heed whom 
you take by the hand
bad things  (See also good and bad)
cards are the devil’s tools; choose the 
lesser of two evils; the devil always 
leaves a stink behind him; evil be to 
him who thinks it; he that touches pitch 
shall be defi led; ill weeds grow apace; 
the love of money is the root of all evil; 
money is the root of all evil; one year’s 
seeding makes seven years’ weeding; 
pigs are pigs; the rotten apple spoils 
the barrel; the sharper the storm, the 
sooner it’s over; shit happens; small 
choice in rotten apples; there’s a skel-
eton in every closet; you can’t keep the 
birds from fl ying over your head, but 
you can keep them from building a nest 
in your hair
barriers
don’t take down a fence unless you are 
sure why it was put up; good fences make 
good neighbors; a hedge between keeps 
friendship green
beauty
age before beauty; beauty and honesty 
seldom agree; beauty draws with a single 
hair; beauty is a good letter of introduc-
tion; beauty is but a blossom; beauty 
is in the eye of the beholder; beauty 
is no inheritance; beauty is only skin-
deep; beauty is truth, truth beauty; boys 
seldom make passes at girls who wear 
glasses; fancy passes beauty; grace will 
last, beauty will blast; Monday’s child is 
fair of face; please your eye and plague 
your heart; small is beautiful; a thing of 
beauty is a joy forever
beginning  (See also raw material)
the fi rst step is the hardest; a good begin-
ning is half the battle; a good beginning 
makes a good ending; great oaks from 
little acorns grow; he who begins many 
things, fi nishes but few; he who would 
climb the ladder must begin at the bot-
tom; hope is a good breakfast but a bad 
supper; an ill beginning makes an ill end-
ing; a journey of a thousand miles begins 
with one step; the mother of mischief is 
no bigger than a midge’s wing; the sooner 
begun, the sooner done; a stream cannot 
rise above its source; there’s a fi rst time 
for everything; well begun is half done; 
what’s past is prologue
behavior
as you sow, so shall you reap; boys will 
be boys; Caesar’s wife must be above 
suspicion; handsome is as handsome does; 
honors change manners; if it looks like a 
duck, walks like a duck, and quacks like 
a duck, it’s a duck; what can you expect 
from a pig but a grunt?; when in Rome, 
do as the Romans do; young saint, old 
devil
belief
believe only half of what you see and 
nothing you hear; a believer is a song-
less bird in a cage; believing has a core 
of unbelieving; the danger past and God 
forgotten; faith will move mountains; see-
ing is believing
betrayal
dead men tell no tales; little birds that can 
sing and won’t sing must be made to sing; 
never tell tales out of school; no names, 
no pack-drill
birds  See animals
Index by Theme
453
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd453   453 1/29/07   5:53:06 PM
birthplace
the man who is born in a stable is not a 
horse; you can take the boy out of the 
country but you can’t take the country 
out of the boy
bluntness
call a spade a spade; children and fools 
speak the truth; hard words break no 
bones; out of the mouths of babes and 
sucklings come great truths; tell the truth 
and shame the devil; truth will out
boasting
don’t hide your light under a bushel; don’t 
talk the talk if you can’t walk the walk; 
every cook praises his own broth; if you’ve 
got it, fl aunt it; much cry and little wool; 
self-praise is no recommendation; toot your 
own horn lest the same be never tooted
boldness  (See also courage)
adventures are to the adventurous; a cat in 
gloves catches no mice; faint heart never 
won fair lady; nothing so bold as a blind 
mare; nothing ventured, nothing gained
books
a book is like a garden carried in the pocket; 
books and friends should be few and good; 
a great book is a great evil; a house without 
books is like a room without windows
borrowing  (See also debt)
the early man never borrows from the 
late man; he that goes a-borrowing, goes 
a-sorrowing; neither a borrower nor a 
lender be
bribery
a bribe will enter without knocking; 
every man has his price; a golden key can 
open any door
business
business before pleasure; business is busi-
ness; business is like a car, it will not 
run by itself except downhill; business 
neglected is business lost; the business of 
America is business; buy in the cheapest 
market and sell in the dearest; corpora-
tions have neither bodies to be punished 
nor souls to be damned ; the customer is 
always right; from shirtsleeves to shirt-
sleeves is only three generations; if you 
don’t speculate, you can’t accumulate; 
keep your shop and your shop will keep 
you; let the buyer beware; never mix 
business with pleasure; no penny, no 
paternoster; one business begets another; 
pay beforehand was never well served; 
punctuality is the soul of business; there 
are tricks in every trade; there’s no such 
thing as a free lunch; trade follows the 
fl ag; what’s good for General Motors is 
good for America
buying and selling
the buyer needs a thousand eyes, the seller 
wants but one; buy in the cheapest market 
and sell in the dearest; the customer is 
always right; let the buyer beware; loca-
tion, location, location; a thing you don’t 
want is dear at any price; the worth of a 
thing is what it will bring; you buy land, 
you buy stones; you buy meat, you buy 
bones; you get what you pay for
calendar
a dripping June sets all in tune; as the 
day lengthens, so the cold strengthens; 
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love; it’s not spring 
until you can plant your foot upon twelve 
daisies; March comes in like a lion, and 
goes out like a lamb; marry in May, rue 
for aye; may chickens come cheeping; 
Index by Theme
454
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd454   454 1/29/07   5:53:06 PM
ne’er cast a clout till May be out; no 
moon, no man
calm
after a storm comes a calm; in a calm sea 
every man is a pilot; music hath charms 
to soothe the savage breast; nothing can 
bring you peace but yourself
capture
catching’s before hanging; in vain the net 
is spread in the sight of the bird; an old 
poacher makes the best gamekeeper; set a 
thief to catch a thief; softly, softly, catchee 
monkey
carefulness
fair and softly goes far in a day; haste 
makes waste; the longest way around 
is the shortest way home; make haste 
slowly; more haste, less speed; one step 
at a time; slow and steady wins the race; 
slow but sure
caution
better safe than sorry; beware of Greeks 
bearing gifts; caution is the parent of 
safety; discretion is the better part of 
valor; don’t burn your bridges behind 
you; don’t go near the water until you 
learn how to swim; don’t put all your 
eggs in one basket; easy does it; fi rst try 
and then trust; a fool’s bolt is soon shot; 
full cup, steady hand; he who fi ghts and 
runs away may live to fi ght another day; 
he who sups with the devil should have 
a long spoon; if and an spoils many a 
good charter; if you can’t be good, be 
careful; it’s better to be on the safe side; 
let the buyer beware; little boats should 
stay close to shore; a live dog is better 
than a dead lion; look before you leap; 
love your enemy, but don’t put a gun in 
his hand; once bitten, twice shy; once 
burned, twice shy; put your trust in God, 
and keep your powder dry; safe bind, 
safe fi nd; second thoughts are best; safety 
fi rst; save something for a rainy day; three 
things are not to be trusted: a cow’s horn, 
a dog’s tooth, and a horse’s hoof; trust 
everybody, but cut the cards; trust not a 
new friend nor an old enemy; trust not 
one night’s ice; when you go to dance, 
take heed whom you take by the hand
certainty  See uncertainty
chance
accidents will happen in the best-regu-
lated families; blind chance sweeps the 
world along; even a blind pig occasionally 
picks up an acorn; lightning never strikes 
twice in the same place; marriage is a lot-
tery; you pays your money and you takes 
your choice
change  (See also reform)
a change is as good as a rest; don’t 
change the rules in the middle of the 
game; don’t jump from the frying pan 
into the fi re; don’t swap horses in mid-
stream; from the sweetest wine, the tart-
est vinegar; the more things change, the 
more they stay the same; a new broom 
sweeps clean; new lords, new laws; one 
nail drives out another; other times, 
other manners; the shoe is on the other 
foot; there are no birds in last year’s 
nest; there’s nothing constant but incon-
stancy; times change, and we with time; 
variety is the spice of life; the wheel of 
fortune is forever in motion; a wise man 
changes his mind, but a fool never does; 
the world runs on wheels; you can’t step 
twice into the same river; young saint, 
old devil
Index by Theme
455
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd455   455 1/29/07   5:53:06 PM
changelessness
as a tree falls, so shall it lie; the more 
things change, the more they stay the 
same; once a priest, always a priest; once 
a thief, always a thief; there’s nothing 
constant but inconstancy; there’s nothing 
new under the sun; what’s done cannot be 
undone; you can drive out nature with a 
pitchfork but she keeps on coming back; 
you can take the boy out of the country 
but you can’t take the country out of the 
boy; you can’t unscramble eggs
character
an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, though 
they be clad in silk or scarlet; the apple 
never falls far from the tree; as the twig 
is bent, so is the tree inclined; beauty is 
only skin-deep; better a good cow than a 
cow of a good kind; be what you would 
seem to be; character is destiny; the child 
is father of the man; great men have great 
faults; the higher the monkey climbs the 
more he shows his tail; if it looks like a 
duck, walks like a duck, and quacks like a 
duck, it’s a duck; it takes one to know one; 
kind hearts are more than coronets; the 
leopard can’t change its spots; like father, 
like son; like mother, like daughter; the 
man who is born in a stable is not a horse; 
nature passes nurture; once a thief, always 
a thief; the proof of the pudding is in the 
eating; a rose by any other name would 
smell as sweet; a rose is a rose is a rose is a 
rose; scratch a Russian and you fi nd a Tar-
tar; still waters run deep; the style is the 
man; there’s many a good cock come out 
of a tattered bag; there’s nowt so queer 
as folk; what can you expect from a pig 
but a grunt?; what’s bred in the bone will 
come out in the fl esh; you can drive out 
nature with a pitchfork but she keeps on 
coming back; you can take the boy out of 
the country but you can’t take the country 
out of the boy
charity
charity begins at home; charity covers a 
multitude of sins; charity is not a bone 
you throw to a dog but a bone you share 
with a dog; give a man a fi sh, and you feed 
him for a day; show him how to fi sh, and 
you feed him for a lifetime
cheerfulness
it’s better to laugh than to cry; laugh and 
grow fat; laugh and the world laughs with 
you, weep and you weep alone; laughter is 
the best medicine; a merry heart makes a 
cheerful countenance; sing before break-
fast, cry before night
children  (See also parents and children)
boys will be boys; children and fools speak 
the truth; children are certain cares, but 
uncertain comforts; children should be 
seen and not heard; the child that is born 
on the Sabbath day is bonny and blithe 
and good and gay; Friday’s child is loving 
and giving; late children, early orphans; 
little pitchers have big ears; May chickens 
come cheeping; Monday’s child is fair of 
face; never work with children or animals; 
no moon, no man; out of the mouths of 
babes and sucklings come great truths; 
praise the child, and you make love to the 
mother; Saturday’s child works hard for its 
living; spare the rod and spoil the child; 
Thursday’s child has far to go; Tuesday’s 
child is full of grace; Wednesday’s child is 
full of woe
choice  (See also indecision)
choose the lesser of two evils; a door must 
be either shut or open; fi sh or cut bait; he 
that has a choice has trouble; no man can 
Index by Theme
456
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd456   456 1/29/07   5:53:06 PM
serve two masters; the obvious choice 
is usually a quick regret; one cannot be 
in two places at once; piss or get off the 
pot; small choice in rotten apples; you 
can’t have it both ways; you can’t have 
your cake and eat it too; you can’t run 
with the hare and hunt with the hounds; 
you can’t serve God and mammon; you’ll 
be damned if you do and damned if you 
don’t; you pays your money and you takes 
your choice
Christianity  See religion
church  See religion
circumstance
circumstances alter cases; cut your coat 
according to your cloth; everybody 
stretches his legs according to the length 
of his coverlet; the shoe is on the other 
foot; stretch your arm no further than 
your sleeve will reach; the vicar of Bray 
will be vicar of Bray still
class
fi ne feathers make fi ne birds; it takes three 
generations to make a gentleman; one half 
of the world doesn’t know how the other 
half lives; when Adam delved and Eve 
span, who was then the gentleman?
clothes  See dress
coercion
he that complies against his will is of his 
own opinion still; little birds that can sing 
and won’t sing must be made to sing; 
one volunteer is worth two pressed men; 
people are more easily led than driven; 
you can lead a horse to water, but you 
can’t make him drink
coincidence
great minds think alike; it’s a small world; 
jesters do oft prove prophets; speak of the 
devil and he always appears
commerce  See business
common sense
ask advice, but use your own common 
sense; never let your education interfere 
with your intelligence; one cannot love 
and be wise; an ounce of common sense 
is worth a pound of theory; an ounce of 
discretion is worth a pound of wit
company  (See also associates)
the company makes the feast; good com-
pany on the road is the shortest cut; 
laugh and the world laughs with you, 
weep and you weep alone; misery loves 
company; the more the merrier; there’s 
safety in numbers; two’s company, three’s 
a crowd
complaining
everybody talks about the weather, but 
nobody does anything about it; every horse 
thinks its own pack heaviest; it’s better to 
light one candle than curse the darkness; 
the squeaky wheel gets the grease
compromise
agree, for the law is costly; give and take 
is fair play; an ill agreement is better than 
a good judgment; it’s better to lose the 
battle and win the war
concealment
the best art conceals art; crime must be 
concealed by crime; an honest look cov-
ereth many faults; murder will out; those 
who hide can fi nd; truth will out; you can 
run, but you can’t hide
Index by Theme
457
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd457   457 1/29/07   5:53:07 PM
conciseness
brevity is the soul of wit; few words are 
best; few words are best; a great book is a 
great evil; length begets loathing
confession
confess and be hanged; confession is 
good for the soul; a fault confessed is 
half redressed; he who excuses himself 
accuses himself
confl ict
all’s fair in love and war; it’s ill sitting at 
Rome and striving with the Pope; it takes 
two to make a quarrel; the only thing a 
heated argument ever produced is cool-
ness; the quarrel of lovers is the renewal 
of love; two of a trade never agree; when 
Greek meets Greek, then comes the tug 
of war; when thieves fall out, honest 
men come by their own; when you argue 
with a fool, make sure he isn’t similarly 
engaged; while two dogs are fi ghting for 
a bone, a third runs away with it; who has 
land has war; you can’t fi ght City Hall
conformity
don’t rock the boat ; if you can’t beat ’em, 
join ’em; it’s better to be right than in the 
majority; strive not against the stream; 
when in Rome, do as the Romans do
conscience
a dear conscience can bear any trouble; 
conscience does make cowards of us all; 
conscience gets a lot of credit that belongs 
to cold feet; do right and fear no man; 
evil doers are evil dreaders; a guilty con-
science needs no accuser; let him who is 
without sin cast the fi rst stone
consequence
as you bake, so shall you brew; as you brew, 
so shall you drink; as you make your bed, 
so you must lie in it; as you sow, so shall 
you reap; for want of a nail the shoe was 
lost, for want of a shoe the horse was lost, 
and for want of a horse the rider was lost; 
garbage in, garbage out; good seed makes a 
good crop; he that drinks beer, thinks beer; 
if you play with fi re, you get burned; let the 
chips fall where they may; nothing comes 
of nothing; one lie leads to another; one 
year’s seeding makes seven years’ weeding; 
they that dance must pay the piper; they 
that sow the wind shall reap the whirlwind; 
who says A must say B; who won’t be ruled 
by the rudder must be ruled by the rock
contentment  (See also happiness; sat-
isfaction)
be happy while you’re living, for you’re 
a long time dead; a contented mind is a 
continual feast; content is more than a 
kingdom; God’s in his heaven; all’s right 
with the world; what you’ve never had 
you never miss
conviviality
the company makes the feast; good com-
pany on the road is the shortest cut; it’s 
always fair weather when good friends get 
together; it’s merry in hall when beards 
wag all; the more the merrier
cooperation
a chain is no stronger than its weakest link; 
a common danger causes common action; 
a dwarf on a giant’s shoulders sees further 
of the two; it takes two to make a bargain; 
it takes two to tango; one hand washes the 
other; union is strength; united we stand, 
divided we fall; you scratch my back and 
I’ll scratch yours
corruption  (See also bribery)
corruption will fi nd a dozen alibis for its 
evil deeds; evil communications corrupt 
Index by Theme
458
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd458   458 1/29/07   5:53:07 PM
good manners; a fi sh stinks from the head; 
he that touches pitch shall be defi led; 
kissing goes by favor; the more you stir 
it, the worse it stinks; power corrupts, 
and absolute power corrupts absolutely; 
the rotten apple spoils the barrel; set a 
beggar on horseback, and he’ll ride to the 
devil; something is rotten in the state of 
Denmark
courage
brave men lived before Agamemnon; 
courage is fear that has said its prayers; 
faint heart never won fair lady; fortune 
favors the brave; none but the brave 
deserve the fair; one courageous thought 
will put to fl ight a host of troubles; the 
only thing we have to fear is fear itself
courtesy
be nice to people on your way up because 
you’ll meet them on your way down; civil-
ity costs nothing; a civil question deserves a 
civil answer; courtesy is contagious; honors 
change manners; manners make the man; 
nice guys fi nish last; punctuality is the 
politeness of kings; there’s nothing lost by 
civility; you can catch more fl ies with honey 
than with vinegar
courtship
faint heart never won fair lady; happy’s 
the wooing that’s not long a-doing; he that 
would the daughter win, must with the 
mother fi rst begin; marry in haste, repent at 
leisure; none but the brave deserve the fair
cowardice
a bully is always a coward; conscience 
does make cowards of us all; conscience 
gets a lot of credit that belongs to cold 
feet; cowards die many times before their 
death
credit
give credit where credit is due; give the 
devil his due; success has many fathers, 
while failure is an orphan
crime  See wrongdoing
crisis
calamity is the touchstone of a brave mind; 
Nero fi ddled while Rome burned; when 
the going gets tough, the tough get going
criticism
the best place for criticism is in front of 
your mirror; the biter is sometimes bit; 
criticism is something you can avoid by 
saying nothing, doing nothing, and being 
nothing; don’t judge a man until you have 
walked a mile in his boots; don’t shoot 
the pianist, he’s doing his best; faults are 
thick where love is thin; he who is absent 
is always in the wrong; he who would 
write and can’t write can surely review; if 
every man would sweep his own doorstep 
the city would soon be clean; if the shoe 
fi ts, wear it; judge not, that ye be not 
judged; let him who is without sin cast 
the fi rst stone; people who live in glass 
houses shouldn’t throw stones; physician, 
heal thyself; the pot calls the kettle black; 
sweep your own doorstep clean
curiosity  See questions
customs
every land has its own law; other times, 
other manners; so many countries, so 
many customs; when in Rome, do as the 
Romans do
danger  (See also risk)
a common danger causes common action; 
fi re is a good servant but a bad master; he 
Index by Theme
459
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd459   459 1/29/07   5:53:07 PM
that is too secure is not safe; he that would 
learn to pray, let him go to sea; he who 
rides a tiger is afraid to dismount; the 
highest branch is not the safest roost; if 
you play with fi re, you get burned; it’s ill 
jesting with edged tools; the post of honor 
is the post of danger; uneasy lies the head 
that wears a crown
days
the better the day, the better the deed; 
the child that is born on the Sabbath 
day is bonny and blithe and good and 
gay; Friday’s child is loving and giving; 
Monday’s child is fair of face; Saturday’s 
child works hard for its living; Thurs-
day’s child has far to go; Tuesday’s child 
is full of grace; Wednesday’s child is full 
of woe
death  (See also premature death)
as a tree falls, so shall it lie ; better death 
than dishonor; blessed are the dead that 
the rain rains on; dead men don’t bite; 
dead men tell no tales; death defi es the 
doctor; death is the great leveler; death 
keeps no calendar; death pays all debts; 
equality begins in the grave; every bul-
let has its billet; every door may be shut 
but death’s door; good Americans, when 
they die, go to Paris; the good that men 
do lives after them; if you’re born to be 
hanged, then you’ll never be drowned; it’s 
better to die on your feet than live on your 
knees; it’s ill waiting for dead men’s shoes; 
let the dead bury the dead; a live dog is 
better than a dead lion; a man can only die 
once; medicine can prolong life, but death 
will seize the doctor, too; never speak 
ill of the dead; one funeral makes many; 
shrouds have no pockets; stone-dead hath 
no fellow; there’s a remedy for everything 
except death; wine has drowned more 
men than the sea; you can only die once; 
you can’t take it with you; young men may 
die, but old men must die
debt  (See also borrowing)
be just before you’re generous; death pays 
all debts; a man in debt is caught in a net; 
out of debt, out of danger; pay as you go 
and nothing you’ll owe; short reckonings 
make long friends; speak not of my debts 
unless you mean to pay them
deceit  See lies
deception
fool me once, shame on you; fool me 
twice, shame on me; there are tricks in 
every trade; you can fool some of the peo-
ple all of the time, and all of the people 
some of the time, but you can’t fool all of 
the people all of the time; you can’t catch 
old birds with chaff
defamation
call a man a thief and he will steal; give 
a dog a bad name and hang him; he that 
would hang his dog gives out fi rst that he 
is mad; never speak ill of the dead; throw 
dirt enough, and some will stick
delay  (See also lateness; procrastination)
delays are dangerous; desires are nourished 
by delays; he who hesitates is lost; hope 
deferred makes the heart sick; revenge is a 
dish best eaten cold; there’s luck in leisure; 
while the grass grows, the steed starves
desire  (See also getting what you want)
appetite comes with eating; desires are 
nourished by delays; don’t wish too hard; 
humble hearts have humble desires; you 
might just get what you wished for; if 
wishes were horses, beggars would ride; 
Index by Theme
460
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd460   460 1/29/07   5:53:07 PM
wishes won’t wash dishes; the wish is 
father to the thought
despair
the darkest hour is just before dawn; if it 
were not for hope, the heart would break
destiny
character is destiny; every bullet has its 
billet; God moves in mysterious ways; 
hanging and wiving go by destiny; if 
you’re born to be hanged, then you’ll 
never be drowned; man proposes, God 
disposes; marriages are made in heaven; 
what goes up must come down; what 
will be, will be; whom the gods would 
destroy, they fi rst make mad
destruction
it’s easier to tear down than to build up; a 
jackass can kick a barn door down, but it 
takes a carpenter to build one; whom the 
gods would destroy, they fi rst make mad
deterioration
don’t jump from the frying pan into the 
fi re; rats desert a sinking ship; when you 
are in a hole, stop digging; the worst is 
yet to come
determination
he who wills the end, wills the means; it’s 
dogged as does it; it’s not the size of the 
dog in the fi ght, it’s the size of the fi ght in 
the dog; nothing is impossible to a willing 
heart; the show must go on; when the 
going gets tough, the tough get going; 
where there’s a will there’s a way; a will-
ful man must have his way
difference
different strokes for different folks; East 
is East and West is West and never the 
twain shall meet; every land has its own 
law; extremes meet; horses for courses; 
it takes all kinds of people to make a 
world; oil and water do not mix; oppo-
sites attract; so many countries, so many 
customs; so many men, so many opinions; 
tastes differ; variety is the spice of life
diffi culty
all things are easy to industry, all things 
diffi cult to sloth ; the diffi cult is done at 
once, the impossible takes a little longer; 
easier said than done; the fi rst hundred 
years are the hardest; life is hard by the 
yard, but by the inch life’s a cinch
diligence  See industry
discipline
spare the rod and spoil the child; when 
the cat’s away, the mice will play; who 
won’t be ruled by the rudder must be 
ruled by the rock
discontent
go farther and fare worse; the golden age 
was never the present age; the grass is 
always greener on the other side of the 
fence
discretion  (See also tact)
don’t wash your dirty linen in public; 
fi elds have eyes and woods have ears; hear 
all, see all, say nowt; loose lips sink ships; 
never tell tales out of school; no names, 
no pack-drill; tell it not in Gath; tell not 
all you know, nor do all you can; think all 
you speak, but speak not all you think; 
think before you speak; walls have ears
disgrace
better death than dishonor; it’s an ill bird 
that fouls its own nest; poverty is no 
Index by Theme
461
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd461   461 1/29/07   5:53:07 PM
disgrace, but it’s a great inconvenience; 
there’s a black sheep in every fl ock; there’s 
a skeleton in every closet
disillusion
absence is the mother of disillusion; 
blessed are they who expect nothing, for 
they shall not be disappointed
disloyalty
rats desert a sinking ship; save us from our 
friends; with friends like that, who needs 
enemies?
disobedience
forbidden fruit is sweet; rules are made 
to be broken
disrespect  See respect
distance
blue are the hills that are far away; dis-
tance lends enchantment to the view
disunity
divide and conquer; a house divided 
against itself cannot stand; united we 
stand, divided we fall
downfall
be nice to people on your way up because 
you’ll meet them on your way down; the 
bigger they are, the harder they fall; from 
the sublime to the ridiculous is only one 
step; give a man enough rope and he’ll 
hang himself; hasty climbers have sudden 
falls; he that is down need fear no fall; 
pride goes before a fall; what goes up 
must come down
drawbacks  (See also good and bad)
the cat would eat fi sh, but would not 
wet her feet; he that would have eggs 
must endure the cackling of hens; no joy 
without annoy; no pain, no gain; there’s 
no pleasure without pain; there’s no rose 
without a thorn; you have to take the bit-
ter with the sweet; you have to take the 
rough with the smooth
dreams
dream of a funeral and you hear of a mar-
riage; dreams go by contraries; dreams 
retain the infi rmities of our character; 
morning dreams come true
dress
an ape’s an ape, a varlet’s a varlet, though 
they be clad in silk or scarlet; better be 
out of the world than out of the fashion; 
clothes don’t make the man; clothes make 
the man; fi ne feathers make fi ne birds; 
ne’er cast a clout till May be out; nine 
tailors make a man; pride feels no pain; 
the tailor makes the man; there’s no such 
thing as bad weather, only the wrong 
clothes
drinking
alcohol will preserve anything but a secret; 
drunkenness reveals what soberness con-
ceals; he that drinks beer, thinks beer; take 
a hair of the dog that bit you; there’s truth 
in wine; water is the only drink for a wise 
man; when the wine is in, the wit is out; 
whiskey and gasoline don’t mix; wine has 
drowned more men than the sea
earliness  (See also promptness)
the early bird catches the worm; the early 
man never borrows from the late man; 
early to bed and early to rise, makes a man 
healthy, wealthy, and wise; fi rst come, 
fi rst served; an hour in the morning is 
worth two in the evening; it’s better to be 
an hour too early than a minute too late; 
Index by Theme
462
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd462   462 1/29/07   5:53:07 PM
one hour’s sleep before midnight is worth 
two after; soon ripe, soon rotten
easiness
all things are easy to industry, all things 
diffi cult to sloth; cross the stream where 
it is shallowest; easy come, easy go; life 
is hard by the yard, but by the inch life’s 
a cinch
eating
after dinner rest awhile, after supper walk 
a mile; an apple a day keeps the doctor 
away; an army marches on its stomach; 
the best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, 
and Dr. Merryman; bread is the staff of 
life; cheese digests all things but itself; diet 
cures more than doctors; eat to live, do not 
live to eat; a fat kitchen makes a lean will; 
feed a cold and starve a fever; fi ngers were 
made before forks; food without hospital-
ity is medicine; gluttony kills more than 
the sword; God never sends mouths but 
he sends meat; God sends meat, but the 
devil sends cooks; help you to salt, help 
you to sorrow; hunger is the best sauce; a 
hungry stomach has no ears; man does not 
live by bread alone; meat and mass never 
hindered man; more die of food than fam-
ine; the way to a man’s heart is through his 
stomach; welcome is the best cheer; you 
are what you eat
eavesdropping
walls have ears; fi elds have eyes and woods 
have ears; listeners never hear any good of 
themselves; little pitchers have big ears
education
education doesn’t come by bumping your 
head against the schoolhouse; genius 
without education is like silver in the 
mine; give a man a fi sh, and you feed 
him for a day; give me a child for the 
fi rst seven years and he is mine for life; 
show him how to fi sh, and you feed 
him for a lifetime; it’s never too late to 
learn; learning is better than house or 
land; never let your education interfere 
with your intelligence; nobody is born 
learned; nobody forgets a good teacher; 
an ounce of practice is worth a pound 
of precept; there’s no royal road to 
learning; those who can, do; those who 
can’t, teach; wear your learning like your 
watch, in a private pocket; when house 
and land are gone and spent, then learn-
ing is most excellent
effi ciency
he travels fastest who travels alone; an 
hour in the morning is worth two in the 
evening; if you want something done, ask 
a busy person; keep no more cats than 
will catch mice; let your head save your 
heels; time is money
effort
he that would eat the fruit must climb the 
tree; if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth 
doing well; no pain, no gain; the only place 
where success comes before work is in a 
dictionary; put your best foot forward; you 
never know what you can do until you try
embarrassment
blushing is a sign of grace; paper does 
not blush
ending
all good things must come to an end; all’s 
well that ends well; the best of friends 
must part; be the day weary or be the day 
long, at last it ringeth to evensong; the end 
crowns the work; everything has an end; 
a good beginning makes a good ending; 
Index by Theme
463
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd463   463 1/29/07   5:53:08 PM
he who laughs last, laughs longest; hope 
is a good breakfast but a bad supper; an ill 
beginning makes an ill ending; it’s not over 
till it’s over; let them laugh that win; the 
opera ain’t over till the fat lady sings; the 
pitcher will go to the well once too often; 
the sooner begun, the sooner done; this, 
too, shall pass; time ends all things
endurance
bear and forbear; be the day weary or be 
the day long, at last it ringeth to evensong; 
a clear conscience can bear any trouble; 
the fi rst seven years are the hardest; God 
makes the back to the burden; the longest 
day must have an end; it’s a long road that 
has no turning; what can’t be cured must 
be endured
enemies
the enemy of my enemy is my friend; it’s 
good to make a bridge of gold to a fl ying 
enemy; love your enemy, but don’t put a 
gun in his hand; one enemy is too much; 
there’s no little enemy; trust not a new 
friend nor an old enemy
England
drought never bred dearth in England; the 
English are a nation of shopkeepers; an 
Englishman’s home is his castle
entertaining
the company makes the feast; a constant 
guest is never welcome; fi sh and guests 
stink after three days; food without hospi-
tality is medicine; the more the merrier; 
welcome is the best cheer
envy
better be envied than pitied; envy never 
dies; the grass is always greener on the other 
side of the fence
equality
all animals are equal, but some are more 
equal than others; all men are created 
equal; a cat can look at a king; death is the 
great leveler; equality begins in the grave; 
Jack’s as good as his master; what’s sauce 
for the goose is sauce for the gander; 
when Adam delved and Eve span, who 
was then the gentleman?
escape
don’t burn your bridges behind you; you 
can run, but you can’t hide
evil  See bad things
exaggeration
old sins cast long shadows; a tale never 
loses in the telling
example
courtesy is contagious; do as I say, not as I 
do; evil communications corrupt good man-
ners; example is better than precept; a good 
example is the best sermon; a good husband 
makes a good wife; a good Jack makes a 
good Jill; if one sheep leaps over the ditch, 
all the rest will follow; like master, like man; 
like people, like priest; parents are patterns; 
people are more easily led than driven; the 
young cock crows as he heard the old one
excellence
cream always comes to the top; the good 
is the enemy of the best; if a thing’s worth 
doing, it’s worth doing well
excess
many are called, but few are chosen; it’s 
the last straw that breaks the camel’s back; 
the last drop makes the cup run over; the 
pitcher will go to the well once too often; 
you can have too much of a good thing
Index by Theme
464
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd464   464 1/29/07   5:53:08 PM
exchange
a fair exchange is no robbery; give and 
take is fair play
excuses
a bad excuse is better than none; a bad 
workman quarrels with his tools; accusing 
the times is but excusing ourselves; cor-
ruption will fi nd a dozen alibis for its evil 
deeds; he who excuses himself accuses 
himself; he who is good at making excuses 
is seldom good at anything else; ignorance 
of the law is no excuse; it’s easy to fi nd a 
stick to beat a dog; killing no murder
exercise
after dinner rest awhile, after supper walk 
a mile; there’s nothing so good for the 
inside of a man as the outside of a horse
expectation
blessed are they who expect nothing, for 
they shall not be disappointed; everybody 
to whom much is given, of him will much 
be required; it’s better to travel hopefully 
than to arrive; it’s ill waiting for dead 
men’s shoes
expediency
the end justifi es the means; if you can’t 
beat ’em, join ’em; it’s better to lose the 
battle and win the war; it’s good to make 
a bridge of gold to a fl ying enemy; killing 
no murder; make a virtue of necessity
experience
a burnt child dreads the fi re; don’t judge 
a man until you have walked a mile in his 
boots; don’t make the same mistake twice; 
don’t teach your grandmother to suck 
eggs; experience is a comb that fate gives a 
man when his hair is all gone; experience is 
the best teacher; experience is the mother 
of wisdom; experience is the teacher of 
fools; experience keeps a dear school; 
learn from the mistakes of others; live 
and learn; the older the wiser; an old fox 
is not easily snared; an old poacher makes 
the best gamekeeper; once bitten, twice 
shy; once burned, twice shy; an ounce 
of practice is worth a pound of precept; 
practice makes perfect; set a thief to catch 
a thief; some folks speak from experience; 
others, from experience, don’t speak; they 
that live longest see most; those who can-
not remember the past are condemned to 
repeat it; a traveler may lie with authority; 
years know more than books; you can’t 
catch old birds with chaff
expertise
every man to his trade; the good seaman is 
known in bad weather; horses for courses; 
a jack of all trades is master of none; let 
the cobbler stick to his last; never send 
a boy to do a man’s job; you can’t beat a 
man at his own game; you need more than 
dancing shoes to be a dancer
exploitation
don’t overload gratitude; if you do, she’ll 
kick; give a man an inch and he’ll take a 
mile; it’s good fi shing in troubled waters; 
nobody ever went broke underestimating 
the intelligence of the American people; 
the willing horse carries the load
extravagance  (See also spending)
Christmas comes but once a year; penny 
wise and pound foolish; spare at the 
spigot, and let out the bunghole; willful 
waste makes woeful want
extremes
East is East and West is West and never the 
twain shall meet; extremes meet; from 
Index by Theme
465
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd465   465 1/29/07   5:53:08 PM
the sweetest wine, the tartest vinegar; 
opposites attract
failure
if anything can go wrong, it will; an ill 
beginning makes an ill ending; a miss is as 
good as a mile; rats desert a sinking ship; 
success has many fathers, while failure is 
an orphan; when one door closes, another 
one opens
fairness
all’s fair in love and war; be just before 
you’re generous; a fair exchange is no 
robbery; fair play’s a jewel; give and take 
is fair play; give credit where credit is 
due; give the devil his due; never give 
a sucker an even break; share and share 
alike; there are two sides to every ques-
tion; turnabout is fair play; what’s sauce 
for the goose is sauce for the gander
fame
brave men lived before Agamemnon; 
everybody has his fi fteen minutes of fame; 
every dog has his day
familiarity
better the devil you know than the devil 
you don’t know; come live with me and 
you’ll know me; familiarity breeds con-
tempt; no man is a hero to his valet; a 
prophet is not without honor, save in his 
own country; you never know a man until 
you live with him; you should know a man 
seven years before you stir his fi re
family  (See also heredity; parents and 
children)
better a good cow than a cow of a good 
kind; blood is thicker than water; char-
ity begins at home; the family that prays 
together stays together; from shirtsleeves 
to shirtsleeves is only three generations; 
he that has a wife and children has given 
hostages to fortune; he travels fastest who 
travels alone; love me, love my dog; a 
mother can take care of ten children, but 
sometimes ten children can’t take care of 
one mother; near is my shirt, but nearer is 
my skin; the shoemaker’s child always goes 
barefoot; there’s a black sheep in every 
fl ock; there’s a skeleton in every closet
fate  See destiny
fear
courage is fear that has said its prayers; 
fear lends wings; the only thing we have 
to fear is fear itself
feelings
the eyes are the mirrors of the soul; out 
of the fullness of the heart the mouth 
speaks
festivals
the better the day, the better the deed; 
Christmas comes but once a year
fi ction
fact is stranger than fi ction; history is a 
fable agreed upon; truth is stranger than 
fi ction
fi nding
fi nders keepers, losers weepers; fi nding 
is keeping
fi rst impressions
beauty is a good letter of introduction; 
fi rst impressions are the most lasting
fl attery
fl attery, like perfume, should be smelled 
but not swallowed; imitation is the sincer-
Index by Theme
466
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd466   466 1/29/07   5:53:08 PM
est form of fl attery; praise the child, and 
you make love to the mother; a rich man’s 
joke is always funny; you can catch more 
fl ies with honey than with vinegar
food  See eating
foolishness
ask a silly question and you get a silly 
answer; children and fools speak the truth; 
empty vessels make the most sound; expe-
rience is the teacher of fools; a fool and his 
money are soon parted; a fool at forty is a 
fool indeed; fools ask questions that wise 
men cannot answer; fools rush in where 
angels fear to tread; fortune favors fools; 
little things please little minds; monkey 
see, monkey do; never give a sucker an 
even break; send a fool to market and a 
fool he’ll return; silence is the fi ttest reply 
to folly; six hours’ sleep for a man, seven 
for a woman, and eight for a fool; there’s 
no fool like an old fool; when the wine is 
in, the wit is out; when you argue with a 
fool, make sure he isn’t similarly engaged; 
a white wall is the fool’s writing paper; 
whom the gods would destroy, they fi rst 
make mad; a wise man changes his mind, 
but a fool never does; young folks think 
old folks to be fools, but old folks know 
young folks to be fools
foresight
nothing is certain but the unforeseen; an 
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of 
cure; prevention is better than cure; a 
stitch in time saves nine; the unexpected 
always happens; who repairs not his gut-
ters repairs his whole house
forethought
action without thought is like shooting 
without aim; let your head save your heels; 
look before you leap; think before you 
speak; a word spoken is past recalling
forgetting
a bellowing cow soon forgets her calf; 
the best way to get even is to forget; an 
elephant never forgets; forgive and forget; 
out of sight, out of mind; seldom seen, 
soon forgotten
forgiveness
charity covers a multitude of sins; every 
dog is allowed one bite; forgive and for-
get; let bygones be bygones; never let the 
sun go down on your anger; offenders 
never pardon; to err is human, to forgive 
divine; to know all is to forgive all; wink 
at small faults
freedom
give a man enough rope and he’ll hang 
himself; liberty is not licence; the price 
of liberty is eternal vigilance; stone walls 
do not a prison make; that government is 
best which governs least
friends
be kind to your friends; books and friends 
should be few and good; a friend to all is 
a friend to none; if it weren’t for them, 
you would be a total stranger; the best of 
friends must part; a dog is a man’s best 
friend; a friend in need is a friend indeed; 
a hedge between keeps friendship green; 
he that has a full purse never wanted a 
friend; it’s always fair weather when good 
friends get together; lend your money and 
lose your friend; love is blind; friendship 
closes its eyes; old friends and old wine 
are best; save us from our friends; short 
reckonings make long friends; short visits 
make long friends; trust not a new friend 
nor an old enemy; wealth makes many 
Index by Theme
467
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd467   467 1/29/07   5:53:08 PM
friends; with friends like that, who needs 
enemies?
frugality  (See also thrift)
don’t spoil the ship for half a penny’s 
worth of tar; penny wise and pound fool-
ish; spare at the spigot, and let out the 
bunghole
futility
in vain the net is spread in the sight 
of the bird; it’s ill sitting at Rome and 
striving with the Pope; it’s no use crying 
over spilled milk; a nod’s as good as a 
wink to a blind horse; the only thing a 
heated argument ever produced is cool-
ness; strive not against the stream; sue a 
beggar and catch a louse; you can’t beat 
a man at his own game; you can’t fi ght 
City Hall
future
the best is yet to be; coming events cast 
their shadows before; the future ain’t what 
it used to be; the golden age was never the 
present age; never is a long time; never say 
never; one of these days is none of these 
days; prosperity is just around the corner; 
time will tell; today is yesterday’s tomor-
row; today you, tomorrow me; tomorrow 
is another day; tomorrow never comes; the 
worst is yet to come
gambling
cards are the devil’s tools; gambling is 
getting nothing for something; lucky at 
cards, unlucky in love
gardening
if you would be happy for a week take a 
wife; if you would be happy for a month 
kill a pig; but if you would be happy 
all your life plant a garden; one for the 
mouse, one for the crow, one to rot, one 
to grow; one year’s seeding makes seven 
years’ weeding; parsley seed goes nine 
times to the devil; sow dry and set wet
generosity  (See also giving)
be just before you’re generous; Friday’s 
child is loving and giving; give a loaf and 
beg a slice; give a man an inch and he’ll 
take a mile; the larger the body, the big-
ger the heart; nothing is given so freely 
as advice
genius  See intellect
getting what you want
all fi sh are not caught with fl ies; ask, and it 
shall be given you; seek, and ye shall fi nd; 
knock, and it shall be opened unto you; 
the cat would eat fi sh, but would not wet 
her feet; faint heart never won fair lady; 
he that would eat the fruit must climb the 
tree; he that would have eggs must endure 
the cackling of hens; hope and have; if the 
mountain will not come to Mohammed, 
Mohammed must go to the mountain; 
none but the brave deserve the fair; no 
pain, no gain; nothing ventured, nothing 
gained; seek and you shall fi nd; wishes 
won’t wash dishes
giving  (See also generosity)
fl owers leave fragrance in the hand that 
bestows them; give a thing, and take a 
thing, to wear the devil’s gold ring; he 
gives twice who gives quickly; it’s better 
to give than to receive; a small gift usually 
gets small thanks
giving up
don’t give up the ship; the game is not 
worth the candle; if you can’t beat ’em, 
join ’em; never say die
Index by Theme
468
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd468   468 1/29/07   5:53:08 PM
God  (See also providence; religion)
all things are possible with God; every 
man for himself and God for us all; God 
helps those who help themselves; God 
makes the back to the burden; God moves 
in mysterious ways; God never sends 
mouths but he sends meat; God tempers 
the wind to the shorn lamb; the Lord 
gives and the Lord takes away; man pro-
poses, God disposes ; man’s extremity is 
God’s opportunity; put your trust in God, 
and keep your powder dry
good and bad  (See also drawbacks)
April showers bring May fl owers; bad 
money drives out good; every cloud has a 
silver lining; if there were no clouds, we 
shouldn’t enjoy the sun; there’s good and 
bad in everything; there’s no rose without 
a thorn; where God builds a church, the 
devil will build a chapel; you buy land, 
you buy stones; you buy meat, you buy 
bones; you have to take the bitter with 
the sweet; you have to take the rough with 
the smooth
good intentions
never do evil that good may come of it; 
the road to hell is paved with good inten-
tions; take the will for the deed
good things  (See also good and bad)
the age of miracles is past; all good things 
must come to an end; the best things in 
life are free; a little of what you fancy 
does you good; what’s good for General 
Motors is good for America; you can have 
too much of a good thing
gossip  (See also rumors)
bad news travels fast; a dog that will fetch 
a bone will carry a bone; gossip is the 
lifeblood of society; gossip is vice enjoyed 
vicariously; never tell tales out of school; 
see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil; a 
tale never loses in the telling; what the 
soldier said isn’t evidence
gratitude
beggars can’t be choosers; don’t bite the 
hand that feeds you; don’t overload grati-
tude; if you do, she’ll kick; never look a 
gift horse in the mouth; praise the bridge 
that carries you over; a small gift usually 
gets small thanks
great and small  (See also greatness; 
size; small things)
better a big fi sh in a little pond than a 
little fi sh in a big pond; better be the 
head of a dog than the tail of a lion; big 
fi sh eat little fi sh; big fl eas have little fl eas 
upon their backs to bite ’em, and little 
fl eas have lesser fl eas, and so ad infi nitum; 
big is beautiful; the dogs bark, but the 
caravan goes on; eagles don’t catch fl ies; 
great trees keep down little ones; if you 
can’t run with the big dogs, stay under the 
porch; little thieves are hanged, but great 
ones escape; a mouse may help a lion; 
a reed before the wind lives on, while 
mighty oaks do fall; too many chiefs and 
not enough Indians; when the cat’s away, 
the mice will play
greatness
behind every great man there is a great 
woman; calamity is the touchstone of a 
brave mind; eagles don’t catch fl ies; from 
the sublime to the ridiculous is only one 
step; full cup, steady hand; great men have 
great faults; the highest branch is not the 
safest roost; the post of honor is the post 
of danger; the sun loses nothing by shining 
into a puddle
Index by Theme
469
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd469   469 1/29/07   5:53:08 PM
greed
don’t kill the goose that lays the golden 
eggs; the eye is bigger than the belly; glut-
tony kills more than the sword; grasp no 
more than the hand will hold; the love of 
money is the root of all evil; the more you 
get, the more you want; much would have 
more; where the carcass is, there will the 
eagles be gathered; you can’t have your 
cake and eat it too
guidance
in a calm sea every man is a pilot; a man 
without a religion is a horse without a 
bridle; people are more easily led than 
driven; who won’t be ruled by the rudder 
must be ruled by the rock
guilt
conscience does make cowards of us all; a 
guilty conscience needs no accuser; if the 
shoe fi ts, wear it; let him who is without 
sin cast the fi rst stone; a man is innocent 
until proven guilty
gullibility
a fool and his money are soon parted; 
fool me once, shame on you; fool me 
twice, shame on me; never give a sucker 
an even break; there’s a sucker born every 
minute; you can fool some of the people 
all of the time, and all of the people some 
of the time, but you can’t fool all of the 
people all of the time
habit
old habits die hard; once a priest, always 
a priest; you can’t teach an old dog new 
tricks
happiness
call no man happy till he dies; a heavy 
purse makes a light heart; if you would be 
happy for a week take a wife; if you would 
be happy for a month kill a pig; but if you 
would be happy all your life plant a gar-
den; it’s a poor heart that never rejoices; 
it’s better to be happy than wise; life is just 
a bowl of cherries; a merry heart makes 
a cheerful countenance; money can’t buy 
happiness; no joy without annoy; sing 
before breakfast, cry before night
harm
dead men don’t bite; hard words break 
no bones; sticks and stones may break my 
bones, but names will never hurt me; the 
tongue is not steel, but it cuts; you can’t 
unscramble eggs
harmony
birds in their little nests agree; a deaf 
husband and a blind wife are always a 
happy couple; good fences make good 
neighbors
haste
always in a hurry, always behind; a fool’s 
bolt is soon shot; fools rush in where angels 
fear to tread; happy’s the wooing that’s not 
long a-doing; haste is from the devil; haste 
makes waste; the hasty bitch bringeth forth 
blind whelps; hasty climbers have sudden 
falls; it’s the pace that kills; marry in haste, 
repent at leisure; more haste, less speed; 
nothing should be done in haste but grip-
ping a fl ea; the obvious choice is usually a 
quick regret; shoot fi rst and ask questions 
afterward
health
after death the doctor; after dinner rest 
awhile, after supper walk a mile; an apple a 
day keeps the doctor away; the best doctors 
are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, and Dr. Merryman; 
a creaking door hangs longest;  death defi es 
Index by Theme
470
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd470   470 1/29/07   5:53:09 PM
the doctor; diet cures more than doctors; 
the doctor is often more to be feared than 
the disease; early to bed and early to rise, 
makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise; 
feed a cold and starve a fever; gluttony kills 
more than the sword; health is not valued 
till sickness comes; health is wealth; if wind 
blows on you through a hole, say your 
prayers and mind your soul; laugh and grow 
fat; laughter is the best medicine; a little of 
what you fancy does you good; one funeral 
makes many; there’s nothing so good for 
the inside of a man as the outside of a horse; 
use legs and have legs
help
four eyes see more than two; if you’re not 
part of the solution, you’re part of the 
problem; many hands make light work; a 
mouse may help a lion; praise the bridge 
that carries you over; they also serve who 
only stand and wait; too many cooks spoil 
the broth; two boys are half a boy, and 
three boys are no boy at all; two heads are 
better than one; you can’t beat somebody 
with nobody
heredity
the apple never falls far from the tree; 
beauty is no inheritance; birth is much 
but breeding more; blood will tell; like 
father, like son; like mother, like daugh-
ter; nature passes nurture; what’s bred in 
the bone will come out in the fl esh
hesitation  See delay
hierarchy
big fl eas have little fl eas upon their backs 
to bite ’em, and little fl eas have lesser 
fl eas, and so ad infi nitum; if two ride 
on a horse, one must ride behind; in 
the country of the blind, the one-eyed 
man is king
hindsight
blessings brighten as they take their fl ight; 
the cow knows not the value of her tail 
till she has lost it; don’t shut the barn 
door after the horse is stolen; health is not 
valued till sickness comes; it’s easy to be 
wise after the event; you never miss the 
water till the well runs dry
hints
a nod’s as good as a wink to a blind horse; 
straws show which way the wind blows; a 
word to the wise is suffi cient
history
happy is the country that has no history; 
history is a fable agreed upon; history 
repeats itself
home
east, west, home’s best; every cock will 
crow upon his own dunghill; home is 
home, be it ever so homely; home is where 
the heart is; home is where you hang your 
hat; the house shows the owner; it takes 
a heap of living to make a house a home; 
a man’s home is his castle; men make 
houses, women make homes; there’s no 
place like home
honesty   (See also truth)
beauty and honesty seldom agree; cheat-
ers never prosper; children and fools 
speak the truth; confession is good for the 
soul; honesty is more praised than prac-
ticed; honesty is the best policy; honesty 
pays; a liar is not believed when he tells 
the truth; tell the truth and shame the 
devil; there’s truth in wine
hope  (See also optimism)
a drowning man will catch at a straw; he 
that lives in hope dances to an ill tune; he 
Index by Theme
471
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd471   471 1/29/07   5:53:09 PM
that lives on hope will die fasting; hope 
and have; hope deferred makes the heart 
sick; hope is a good breakfast but a bad 
supper; if it were not for hope, the heart 
would break; it’s better to travel hopefully 
than to arrive; it’s not over till it’s over; 
never say die; the opera ain’t over till the 
fat lady sings; where there’s no vision, the 
people perish; while there’s life there’s 
hope; the wish is father to the thought
hospitality  See entertaining
human nature
the best of men are but men at best; hope 
springs eternal in the human breast; self-
preservation is the fi rst law of nature; sin, 
sorrow, and work are the things that men 
can’t shirk; to err is human, to forgive 
divine
humility (See also meekness)
the meek shall inherit the earth; soft 
and fair goes far; softly, softly, catchee 
monkee
hunger
an empty sack cannot stand upright; a 
growing youth has a wolf in his stomach; 
hunger drives the wolf out of the wood; 
hunger is the best sauce; a hungry man is an 
angry man; a hungry stomach has no ears; 
it’s ill speaking between a full man and a 
fasting; more die of food than famine
hygiene
cleanliness is next to godliness; poverty 
comes from God, but not dirt; we must 
eat a peck of dirt before we die
hypocrisy
the devil was sick, the devil a saint would 
be; the devil was well, the devil a saint 
was he; do as I say, not as I do; many kiss 
the hand they wish to see cut off; the 
nearer the church, the farther from God
ideas
all words are pegs to hang ideas on; one 
story is good till another is told; an ounce 
of common sense is worth a pound of 
theory; thinking is very far from knowing
idleness
all things are easy to industry, all things 
diffi cult to sloth; as good be an addled 
egg as an idle bird; better to wear out 
than to rust out; the devil fi nds work for 
idle hands to do; footprints on the sands 
of time are not made by sitting down; he 
who does not work, neither should he 
eat; an idle brain is the devil’s workshop; 
idleness is the root of all evil; idle people 
have the least leisure; an idle youth, a 
needy age; mind unemployed is mind 
unenjoyed; sloth is the mother of pov-
erty; time hangs heavy on idle hands; you 
snooze, you lose
ignorance
admiration is the daughter of ignorance; 
the husband is always the last to know; 
if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch; ignorance is a voluntary 
misfortune; ignorance is bliss; ignorance 
of the law is no excuse; much water goes 
by the mill that the miller knows not 
of; nothing so bold as a blind mare; one 
half of the world doesn’t know how the 
other half lives; prejudice is being down 
on what we are not up on; prejudice is 
the child of ignorance; a slice off a cut 
loaf isn’t missed; those who know don’t 
speak; those who speak don’t know; what 
the eye doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t 
grieve over; what you don’t know can’t 
Index by Theme
472
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd472   472 1/29/07   5:53:09 PM
hurt you; zeal without knowledge is a 
runaway horse
illusion
admiration is the daughter of ignorance; 
blue are the hills that are far away; catch 
not at the shadow and lose the substance; 
distance lends enchantment to the view; 
the golden age was never the present age; 
self-deceit is the easiest of any; there’s a 
pot of gold at the end of the rainbow
imitation
as Maine goes, so goes the nation; imitation 
is the sincerest form of fl attery; like breeds 
like; like master, like man; like people, like 
priest; monkey see, monkey do
impatience  See patience
imperfection
nobody is perfect; there’s good and bad 
in everything
impossibility
the diffi cult is done at once, the impos-
sible takes a little longer; there’s a pot of 
gold at the end of the rainbow; you can’t 
get a quart into a pint pot; you can’t get 
blood from a stone; you can’t make a 
silk purse out of a sow’s ear; you can’t 
make bricks without straw; you can’t put 
a square peg in a round hole; you can’t 
unscramble eggs
improbability
the age of miracles is past; if a pig had 
wings, it might fl y; if ifs and ans were 
pots and pans, there’d be no work for 
tinkers; if the sky falls, we shall catch 
larks; if wishes were horses, beggars 
would ride
improvement
after a storm comes a calm; the best is 
yet to be; better luck next time; the dark-
est hour is just before dawn; everybody 
talks about the weather, but nobody does 
anything about it; it’s a long road that has 
no turning; it’s never too late to mend; 
prosperity is just around the corner; a ris-
ing tide lifts all boats; when things are at 
the worst they begin to mend
inaction
care is no cure; councils of war never 
fi ght; lookers-on see most of the game; 
they also serve who only stand and wait; 
when in doubt, do nothing
incompetence
a bad workman quarrels with his tools; 
every employee tends to rise to his level 
of incompetence; he who would write 
and can’t write can surely review; if you 
pay peanuts, you get monkeys; those who 
can, do; those who can’t, teach; war is too 
important to be left to the generals
incompleteness
a bird never fl ew on one wing; fools and 
children should never see half-done work
indecision   (See also choice)
between two stools one falls to the 
ground; councils of war never fi ght; he 
who hesitates is lost; if you run after two 
hares, you will catch neither; when in 
doubt, do nothing
independence  See self-reliance
industry
all things are easy to industry, all things 
diffi cult to sloth; the busiest men have the 
most leisure; diligence is the mother of 
Index by Theme
473
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd473   473 1/29/07   5:53:09 PM
good luck; footprints on the sands of time 
are not made by sitting down; genius is 
an infi nite capacity for taking pains; if you 
want something done, ask a busy person; 
necessity sharpens industry; where bees 
are, there is honey; where there’s muck 
there’s brass
ineffi ciency
always in a hurry, always behind; a horse 
can’t pull while kicking; more haste, less 
speed
infl exibility
a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of 
little minds; a wise man changes his mind, 
but a fool never does
infl uence
art is power; as Maine goes, so goes the 
nation; beauty draws with a single hair; 
behind every great man there is a great 
woman; give me a child for the fi rst seven 
years and he is mine for life; a golden key 
can open any door; the hand that rocks 
the cradle rules the world; hitch your 
wagon to a star; it’s not what you know, 
but who you know; money talks
inheritance
a fat kitchen makes a lean will; most 
people consider thrift a fi ne virtue in 
ancestors
innovation
everything old is new again; there’s noth-
ing new under the sun; what’s new cannot 
be true; you can’t put new wine in old 
bottles
integrity
it’s better to be right than in the major-
ity; a man’s word is as good as his bond; 
think all you speak, but speak not all you 
think; true blue will never stain
intellect
genius is an infi nite capacity for taking 
pains; genius is one percent inspiration 
and ninety-nine percent perspiration; 
genius without education is like silver 
in the mine; a mind is a terrible thing 
to waste; mind unemployed is mind 
unenjoyed
interference
busy folks are always meddling; the more 
you stir it, the worse it stinks; you should 
know a man seven years before you stir 
his fi re
jocularity
it’s better to laugh than to cry; jesters do 
oft prove prophets; many a true word is 
spoken in jest; an ounce of discretion is 
worth a pound of wit
judgment
comparisons are odious; don’t judge a 
man until you have walked a mile in his 
boots; judge not, that ye be not judged; 
the proof of the pudding is in the eating; 
there’s good and bad in everything
kindness
be nice to people on your way up because 
you’ll meet them on your way down; cold 
hands, warm heart; don’t hit a man when 
he’s down; God tempers the wind to the 
shorn lamb; kind hearts are more than 
coronets; the larger the body, the bigger 
the heart; nice guys fi nish last
knowledge
knowledge and timber shouldn’t be much 
used until they are seasoned; knowledge 
Index by Theme
474
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd474   474 1/29/07   5:53:09 PM
and wisdom are far from being one; 
knowledge is power; let the cobbler stick 
to his last; little birds that can sing and 
won’t sing must be made to sing; a little 
knowledge is a dangerous thing; an ounce 
of discretion is worth a pound of wit; 
thinking is very far from knowing; those 
who know don’t speak; those who speak 
don’t know; who knows most, speaks 
least; you can’t put an old head on young 
shoulders
lateness
after death the doctor; better late than 
never; don’t shut the barn door after the 
horse is stolen; experience is a comb that 
fate gives a man when his hair is all gone; 
it’s better to be an hour too early than a 
minute too late; while the grass grows, 
the steed starves
laughter  See cheerfulness; jocularity
law
agree, for the law is costly; the devil makes 
his Christmas pies of lawyers’ tongues and 
clerks’ fi ngers; every land has its own 
law; hard cases make bad law; ignorance 
of the law is no excuse; an ill agreement 
is better than a good judgment; justice is 
blind; the king can do no wrong; lawmak-
ers should not be lawbreakers; laws go as 
kings like; a man is innocent until proven 
guilty; a man who is his own lawyer has a 
fool for his client; new lords, new laws; 
nobody is above the law; one law for the 
rich and another for the poor; possession 
is nine points of the law; sue a beggar and 
catch a louse; when in Rome, do as the 
Romans do; a wise lawyer never goes to 
law himself
laziness  See idleness
leadership
a fi sh stinks from the head; a good leader 
is also a good follower; he that cannot 
obey cannot command; if one sheep leaps 
over the ditch, all the rest will follow; war 
is too important to be left to the generals
learning  See education; knowledge
lending
lend your money and lose your friend; 
neither a borrower nor a lender be
lies
ask me no questions and I’ll tell you no 
lies; half the truth is often a whole lie; 
jove but laughs at lover’s perjury; a liar 
is not believed when he tells the truth; 
a liar is worse than a thief; a liar should 
have a good memory; a lie can go around 
the world and back again while the truth 
is lacing up its boots; one lie leads to 
another; show me a liar and I will show 
you a thief; there are lies, damned lies, 
and statistics; what a tangled web we 
weave when fi rst we practice to deceive
life
all the world’s a stage; the fi rst hundred 
years are the hardest; he lives long who 
lives well; life begins at forty; life is hard 
by the yard, but by the inch life’s a cinch; 
life is just a bowl of cherries; life is no bed 
of roses; life isn’t all beer and skittles; life 
is short and sweet; life is short and time is 
swift; life is too short; life is what you make 
it; life’s a bitch, and then you die; a live dog 
is better than a dead lion; man does not live 
by bread alone; while there’s life there’s 
hope; the world runs on wheels
living within your means
cut your coat according to your cloth; 
everybody stretches his legs according to 
Index by Theme
475
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd475   475 1/29/07   5:53:09 PM
the length of his coverlet; stretch your 
arm no further than your sleeve will 
reach
logic
every why hath its wherefore; there’s rea-
son in all things; two and two make four; 
who says A must say B
loss  See also winning and losing
blessings brighten as they take their fl ight; 
the cow knows not the value of her tail till 
she has lost it; don’t throw good money 
after bad; easy come, easy go; fi nders 
keepers, losers weepers; good riddance to 
bad rubbish; the Lord gives and the Lord 
takes away; quickly come, quickly go; a 
slice off a cut loaf isn’t missed; there are 
other fi sh in the sea; ’tis better to have 
loved and lost, than never to have loved at 
all; what you’ve never had you never miss; 
you can’t lose what you never had; you 
never miss the water till the well runs dry
love
absence makes the heart grow fonder; 
all’s fair in love and war; better a dinner 
of herbs where love is than a stalled ox 
where hate is; cold hands, warm heart; the 
course of true love never did run smooth; 
Friday’s child is loving and giving; home is 
where the heart is; hot love is soon cold; 
in the spring a young man’s fancy lightly 
turns to thoughts of love; it’s best to be 
off with the old love before you are on 
with the new; jove but laughs at lover’s 
perjury; love and a cough cannot be hid; 
love begets love; love conquers all; love 
is blind; love is blind; friendship closes 
its eyes; love is free; love laughs at lock-
smiths; love makes the world go round; 
love me little, love me long; love me, 
love my dog; love will fi nd a way; lucky 
at cards, unlucky in love; one cannot love 
and be wise; pity is akin to love; the quar-
rel of lovers is the renewal of love; there 
are other fi sh in the sea; ’tis better to have 
loved and lost, than never to have loved 
at all; when poverty comes in at the door, 
love fl ies out of the window
loyalty
dog does not eat dog; a dog is a man’s best 
friend; hawks will not pick out hawks’ 
eyes; it’s an ill bird that fouls its own nest; 
no man can serve two masters; there’s 
honor among thieves; whose bread I eat, 
his song I sing; you can’t run with the hare 
and hunt with the hounds
luck
better luck next time; a cat has nine lives; 
the devil looks after his own; the devil’s 
children have the devil’s luck; diligence 
is the mother of good luck; every dog 
has his day; fortune favors fools; fortune 
favors the brave; it’s better to be born 
lucky than rich; lucky at cards, unlucky 
in love; opportunities look for you when 
you are worth fi nding; opportunity never 
knocks for persons not worth a rap; 
providence is always on the side of the big 
battalions; see a pin and pick it up, all the 
day you’ll have good luck; see a pin and 
let it lay, bad luck you’ll have all the day; 
take the goods the gods provide; there’s 
luck in odd numbers; the third time is the 
charm; touch wood; the wheel of fortune 
is forever in motion
lying  See lies
marriage
always a bridesmaid, never a bride; bet-
ter be an old man’s darling than a young 
man’s slave; better one house spoiled 
Index by Theme
476
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd476   476 1/29/07   5:53:10 PM
than two; a deaf husband and a blind wife 
are always a happy couple; every Jack 
has his Jill; fi rst thrive and then wive; a 
good husband makes a good wife; a good 
Jack makes a good Jill; the gray mare is 
the better horse; hanging and wiving go 
by destiny; happy is the bride that the 
sun shines on; happy’s the wooing that’s 
not long a-doing; he that has a wife and 
children has given hostages to fortune; 
he that will thrive must fi rst ask his wife; 
honest men marry quickly, wise men not 
at all; the husband is always the last to 
know; keep your eyes wide open before 
marriage, half shut afterward; marriage is 
a lottery; marriages are made in heaven; 
marry in haste, repent at leisure; marry in 
May, rue for aye; never marry for money, 
but marry where money is; old maids lead 
apes in hell; one wedding brings another; 
there goes more to marriage than four 
bare legs in a bed; wedlock is a padlock; 
when a man’s single, his pockets will 
jingle; why buy the cow when you can get 
the milk for free?; a young man married 
is a young man marred
meaning
every picture tells a story; one picture is 
worth ten thousand words
mediocrity
in the country of the blind, the one-eyed 
man is king; a jack of all trades is master 
of none
meekness (See also humility)
even a worm will turn; the meek shall 
inherit the earth
memory
an elephant never forgets; a liar should 
have a good memory
men  (See also men and women)
boys will be boys; the way to a man’s 
heart is through his stomach
men and women  (See also men; women)
behind every great man there is a great 
woman; can’t live with ’em, can’t live 
without ’em; every Jack has his Jill; the 
female of the species is deadlier than 
the male; a good husband makes a good 
wife; a good Jack makes a good Jill; the 
gray mare is the better horse; it’s a sad 
house where the hen crows louder than 
the cock; a man is as old as he feels, and a 
woman as old as she looks; men are from 
Mars, women are from Venus; men make 
houses, women make homes; six hours’ 
sleep for a man, seven for a woman, and 
eight for a fool; a son is a son till he gets 
him a wife, a daughter’s a daughter all of 
her life
merit
desert and reward seldom keep company; 
give credit where credit is due; it’s a 
poor dog that’s not worth whistling for; 
opportunities look for you when you are 
worth fi nding
merrymaking
the company makes the feast; eat, drink, 
and be merry, for tomorrow we die; it’s 
merry in hall when beards wag all; laugh 
and grow fat; the more the merrier
misfortune
accidents will happen in the best-regulated 
families; bad news travels fast; the best-laid 
schemes of mice and men gang aft a-gley; 
bread always falls buttered side down; help 
you to salt, help you to sorrow; if anything 
can go wrong, it will; into every life a little 
rain must fall; it never rains but it pours; 
Index by Theme
477
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd477   477 1/29/07   5:53:10 PM
it’s an ill wind that blows nobody any 
good; it’s no use crying over spilled milk; 
lightning never strikes twice in the same 
place; many go out for wool and come 
home shorn; marry in May, rue for aye; 
misfortunes never come singly; one man’s 
loss is another man’s gain; shit happens; 
worse things happen at sea
mistakes
accidents will happen in the best-regulated 
families; don’t make the same mistake 
twice; Homer sometimes nods; if you don’t 
make mistakes you don’t make anything; 
learn from the mistakes of others; a miss 
is as good as a mile; nobody is infallible; a 
stumble may prevent a fall; there’s many a 
slip between cup and lip; those who can-
not remember the past are condemned to 
repeat it; to err is human, to forgive divine
moderation
enough is as good as a feast; enough is 
enough; the half is better than the whole; 
less is more; love me little, love me long; 
moderation in all things; tell not all you 
know, nor do all you can; there’s measure 
in all things
modesty
don’t hide your light under a bushel; it’s 
all in a day’s work; wear your learning like 
your watch, in a private pocket
money  (See also payment; spending; 
wealth)
another day, another dollar; bad money 
drives out good; the best things in life are 
free; don’t throw good money after bad; 
a fool and his money are soon parted; a 
golden key can open any door; a heavy 
purse makes a light heart; it takes money 
to make money; a light purse makes a 
heavy heart; little and often fi lls the purse; 
the love of money is the root of all evil; 
money begets money; money can’t buy 
happiness; money doesn’t grow on trees; 
money has no smell; money isn’t every-
thing; money is power; money is round 
and rolls away; money is the root of all 
evil; money makes the mare go; money 
makes the world go round; money talks; 
never marry for money, but marry where 
money is; riches have wings; save some-
thing for a rainy day; saving is getting; 
shrouds have no pockets; take care of the 
pennies and the dollars will take care of 
themselves; time is money; where there’s 
muck there’s brass; you can’t serve God 
and mammon; you can’t take it with you
months  See calendar
mortality
art is long and life is short; be happy 
while you’re living, for you’re a long 
time dead; eat, drink, and be merry, for 
tomorrow we die; every door may be 
shut but death’s door; gather ye rosebuds 
while ye may; life is short and sweet; life 
is short and time is swift; life is too short; 
life’s a bitch, and then you die; live every 
day as though it were your last; medicine 
can prolong life, but death will seize the 
doctor, too; old soldiers never die; young 
men may die, but old men must die
music
music hath charms to soothe the savage 
breast; why should the devil have all the 
best tunes?
names
a rose by any other name would smell as 
sweet; a rose is a rose is a rose is a rose; 
what’s in a name?
Index by Theme
478
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd478   478 1/29/07   5:53:10 PM
nature  (See also human nature)
God made the country and man made the 
town; it’s not spring until you can plant 
your foot upon twelve daisies; nature 
abhors a vacuum; nature does nothing in 
vain; nature will have its course; self-pres-
ervation is the fi rst law of nature; you can 
drive out nature with a pitchfork but she 
keeps on coming back
necessity
any port in a storm; beggars can’t be 
choosers; desperate diseases must have 
desperate remedies; dirty water will 
quench fi re; hunger drives the wolf out of 
the wood; if the mountain will not come 
to Mohammed, Mohammed must go to 
the mountain; make a virtue of necessity; 
a man’s got to do what a man’s got to 
do; necessity is the mother of invention; 
necessity knows no law; necessity sharp-
ens industry; need makes the old wife 
trot; needs must when the devil drives; 
when all fruit fails, welcome haws; when 
all you have is a hammer, everything looks 
like a nail; you can’t make an omelette 
without breaking eggs
neglect
a mother can take care of ten children, 
but sometimes ten children can’t take care 
of one mother; one year’s seeding makes 
seven years’ weeding; the shoemaker’s 
child always goes barefoot; there’s a sin of 
omission as well as of commission
news
bad news travels fast; don’t shoot the mes-
senger; go abroad and you’ll hear news of 
home; he comes too early who brings bad 
news ; no news is good news; when a dog 
bites a man, that is not news; but when a 
man bites a dog, that is news
nobility
everybody loves a lord; it takes three 
generations to make a gentleman; kind 
hearts are more than coronets; when 
Adam delved and Eve span, who was then 
the gentleman?
noise
a bellowing cow soon forgets her calf; 
much cry and little wool; the squeaky 
wheel gets the grease
noninterference
don’t rock the boat; if it ain’t broke, 
don’t fi x it; leave well enough alone; let 
sleeping dogs lie; let the cobbler stick to 
his last; mind your own business; never 
trouble trouble till trouble troubles you; 
when in doubt, do nothing
numbers
there’s luck in odd numbers; things come 
in threes; the third time is the charm
obedience
the fi rst duty of a soldier is obedience; a 
good leader is also a good follower; he 
that cannot obey cannot command; obey 
orders, if you break owners
objectivity
justice is blind; lookers-on see most of 
the game
observation
the eye of a master does more work than 
both his hands; four eyes see more than 
two; keep your mouth shut and your eyes 
open; lookers-on see most of the game; 
seeing is believing
obstinacy
little birds that can sing and won’t sing 
must be made to sing; stick to your guns; 
Index by Theme
479
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd479   479 1/29/07   5:53:10 PM
there are none so blind as those who will 
not see; there are none so deaf as those 
who will not hear; a willful man must 
have his way; you can lead a horse to 
water, but you can’t make him drink; you 
can’t get blood from a stone
offense
the greater the truth, the greater the libel; 
hell hath no fury like a woman scorned; 
neither give nor take offense
old age  See age
opinion
he that complies against his will is of his 
own opinion still; so many men, so many 
opinions; thinking is very far from know-
ing; thought is free; a wise man changes 
his mind, but a fool never does
opportunity
all is fi sh that comes to the net; all is grist 
that comes to the mill; a bleating sheep 
loses a bite; business neglected is business 
lost; Christmas comes but once a year; 
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow 
we die; every dog has his day; gather ye 
rosebuds while ye may; the gods send 
nuts to those who have no teeth; he that 
will not when he may, when he will he 
may have nay; hoist your sail when the 
wind is fair; the hole calls the thief; it’s 
good fi shing in troubled waters; life is 
short and time is swift; make hay while 
the sun shines; the mill cannot grind 
with the water that is past; opportunities 
look for you when you are worth fi nding; 
opportunity knocks but once; opportu-
nity never knocks for persons not worth 
a rap; peace makes plenty; a postern door 
makes a thief; seize the day; strike while 
the iron is hot; take the goods the gods 
provide; take time by the forelock; there 
are other fi sh in the sea; there’s a tide in 
the affairs of man; there’s no time like the 
present; time and tide wait for no man; 
when one door closes, another one opens; 
when the cat’s away, the mice will play; 
while two dogs are fi ghting for a bone, 
a third runs away with it; you can lead a 
horse to water, but you can’t make him 
drink; you’re only young once
oppression
the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the 
church; it’s better to die on your feet than 
live on your knees
optimism  (See also hope)
all’s for the best in the best of all possible 
worlds; always look on the bright side; 
another day, another dollar; April show-
ers bring May fl owers; the best is yet to 
be; the darkest hour is just before dawn; 
don’t count your chickens before they are 
hatched; every cloud has a silver lining; the 
glass is either half empty or half full; God’s 
in his heaven; all’s right with the world; 
hope for the best and prepare for the 
worst; hope springs eternal in the human 
breast; it’s an ill wind that blows nobody 
any good; nothing so bad but it might have 
been worse ; prosperity is just around the 
corner; there’s no great loss without some 
gain; tomorrow is another day
options
don’t put all your eggs in one basket; the 
mouse that has but one hole is quickly 
taken; there are other fi sh in the sea
order
don’t put the cart before the horse; fi rst 
catch your hare; fi rst things fi rst; last but 
not least; which came fi rst, the chicken 
or the egg?
Index by Theme
480
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd480   480 1/29/07   5:53:10 PM
overambitiousness
cut your coat according to your cloth; 
don’t bite off more than you can chew; 
don’t go near the water until you learn 
how to swim; don’t start anything you 
can’t fi nish; everybody stretches his legs 
according to the length of his coverlet; 
grasp no more than the hand will hold; he 
who begins many things, fi nishes but few; 
stretch your arm no further than your 
sleeve will reach
overconfi dence
don’t count your chickens before they 
are hatched; don’t shout until you are 
out of the woods; he that is too secure is 
not safe; let them laugh that win; a little 
knowledge is a dangerous thing; there’s 
many a slip between cup and lip
overreaction
burn not your house to scare away the 
mice; don’t throw out the baby with the 
bathwater
parents and children  (See also chil-
dren; family; heredity)
the art of being a parent consists of sleep-
ing when the baby isn’t looking; children 
are certain cares, but uncertain comforts; 
happy is he that is happy in his children; 
he that has a wife and children has given 
hostages to fortune; he that would the 
daughter win, must with the mother fi rst 
begin; it’s a wise child that knows its 
own father; late children, early orphans; 
a mother can take care of ten children, 
but sometimes ten children can’t take 
care of one mother; parents are patterns; 
praise the child, and you make love to 
the mother; a son is a son till he gets him 
a wife, a daughter’s a daughter all of her 
life; the tree is known by its fruit
past  (See also history)
the future ain’t what it used to be; the 
golden age was never the present age; 
it’s no use crying over spilled milk; let 
bygones be bygones; let the dead bury 
the dead; the mill cannot grind with the 
water that is past; old sins cast long shad-
ows; other times, other manners; there 
are no birds in last year’s nest; things past 
cannot be recalled; those who cannot 
remember the past are condemned to 
repeat it; what’s done cannot be undone; 
what’s past is prologue; yesterday will not 
be called again; you can’t go home again
patience
all commend patience, but none can 
endure to suffer; all things come to those 
who wait; bear and forbear; desires are 
nourished by delays; fi rst things fi rst; 
hurry no man’s cattle; the longest way 
around is the shortest way home; noth-
ing should be done in haste but gripping 
a fl ea; one step at a time; patience is a 
remedy for every sorrow; patience is a 
virtue; revenge is a dish best eaten cold; 
Rome was not built in a day; slow and 
steady wins the race; softly, softly, catchee 
monkey; there’s luck in leisure; they also 
serve who only stand and wait; a watched 
pot never boils; we must learn to walk 
before we can run
patriotism
patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel
payment
he who pays the piper calls the tune; if 
you pay peanuts, you get monkeys; the 
laborer is worthy of his hire; no penny, 
no paternoster; nothing for nothing; pay 
as you go and nothing you’ll owe; pay 
beforehand was never well served; pay 
Index by Theme
481
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd481   481 1/29/07   5:53:10 PM
what you owe and you’ll know what you 
own; render unto Caesar that which is 
Caesar’s; there’s no such thing as a free 
lunch; they that dance must pay the piper; 
whose bread I eat, his song I sing; you 
don’t get something for nothing; you get 
what you pay for
peace
if you want peace, prepare for war; one 
sword keeps another in its scabbard; 
peace makes plenty; war will cease when 
men refuse to fi ght
perfection
the best is the enemy of the good; God’s 
in his heaven; all’s right with the world; 
trifl es make perfection, and perfection 
is no trifl e
perseverance
if at fi rst you don’t succeed, try, try again; 
it’s dogged as does it; it’s idle to swallow 
the cow and choke on the tail; the race 
is not to the swift, nor the battle to the 
strong; Rome was not built in a day; a 
stern chase is a long chase; the third time 
is the charm; the vicar of Bray will be 
vicar of Bray still; a winner never quits, 
and a quitter never wins
persistence
constant dropping wears away a stone; 
don’t give up the ship; little strokes fell 
great oaks; never say die; the pitcher will 
go to the well once too often; the squeaky 
wheel gets the grease; the tongue always 
returns to the sore tooth
pessimism
the glass is either half empty or half full; 
the worst is yet to come
pity  See sympathy
plans
the best-laid schemes of mice and men 
gang aft a-gley; man proposes, God dis-
poses
pleasing people
you can’t be all things to all men; you 
can’t please everybody; you’ll be damned 
if you do and damned if you don’t
pleasure
forbidden fruit is sweet; stolen waters are 
sweet; there’s no pleasure without pain; 
they that dance must pay the piper
politics
in politics a man must learn to rise above 
principle; politics makes strange bedfel-
lows
positive thinking
it’s better to laugh than to cry; the only 
difference between stumbling blocks 
and stepping-stones is the way you use 
them
possession
a bird in the hand is worth two in the 
bush; fi nders keepers, losers weepers; 
fi nding is keeping; nought is never in 
danger; pay what you owe and you’ll 
know what you own; possession is nine 
points of the law; what you’ve never had 
you never miss; you can’t lose what you 
never had
possibility
all things are possible with God; nothing 
is impossible to a willing heart; whatever 
man has done, man may do; what has hap-
pened once can happen again
Index by Theme
482
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd482   482 1/29/07   5:53:11 PM
poverty
better a dinner of herbs where love is than 
a stalled ox where hate is; both poverty and 
prosperity come from spending money—
prosperity from spending it wisely; an 
empty sack cannot stand upright; from 
shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves is only three 
generations; a light purse makes a heavy 
heart; one law for the rich and another 
for the poor; poverty comes from God, 
but not dirt; poverty is no disgrace, but 
it’s a great inconvenience; poverty is not 
a crime; the rich get richer and the poor 
get poorer; the rich man has his ice in the 
summer and the poor man gets his in the 
winter; sloth is the mother of poverty; sue 
a beggar and catch a louse; when poverty 
comes in at the door, love fl ies out of the 
window; willful waste makes woeful want
power
anger without power is folly; better be 
fi rst in a village than second at Rome; 
big fi sh eat little fi sh; he who pays the 
piper calls the tune; the highest branch 
is not the safest roost; in the country of 
the blind, the one-eyed man is king; it’s 
ill sitting at Rome and striving with the 
Pope; kings have long arms; knowledge 
is power; love conquers all; a man’s home 
is his castle; might makes right; money 
is power; power corrupts, and absolute 
power corrupts absolutely; providence is 
always on the side of the big battalions; 
uneasy lies the head that wears a crown
praise
give credit where credit is due; imitation 
is the sincerest form of fl attery; praise the 
bridge that carries you over
prediction
coming events cast their shadows before; 
jesters do oft prove prophets; long fore-
told, long last; short notice, soon past; 
nothing is certain but the unforeseen; one 
swallow does not make a summer; straws 
show which way the wind blows; the 
unexpected always happens
prejudice
no tree takes so deep a root as prejudice; 
prejudice is being down on what we are not 
up on; prejudice is the child of ignorance
premature death
God takes soonest those he loves best; the 
good die young; whom the gods love die 
young; young men may die, but old men 
must die
preparation
dig the well before you are thirsty; don’t 
go near the water until you learn how to 
swim; the early man never borrows from 
the late man; forewarned is forearmed; 
hope for the best and prepare for the 
worst; if you want peace, prepare for 
war; nothing is certain but the unfore-
seen; one sword keeps another in its 
scabbard; put your trust in God, and keep 
your powder dry; speak softly and carry 
a big stick
present
eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow 
we die; gather ye rosebuds while ye may; 
the golden age was never the present age; 
jam tomorrow and jam yesterday, but 
never jam today; seize the day; there’s no 
time like the present; today is yesterday’s 
tomorrow
pride
nobody is indispensable; pride feels no 
pain; pride goes before a fall
Index by Theme
483
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd483   483 1/29/07   5:53:11 PM
privacy
good fences make good neighbors; a 
hedge between keeps friendship green; a 
man’s home is his castle
problems
the course of true love never did run 
smooth; drive gently over the stones; 
every horse thinks its own pack heaviest; 
one courageous thought will put to fl ight 
a host of troubles; the only difference 
between stumbling blocks and stepping-
stones is the way you use them; those who 
play at bowls must look out for rubbers; a 
trouble shared is a trouble halved
problem-solving
avoidance is the only remedy; care is no 
cure; everybody talks about the weather, 
but nobody does anything about it; if 
you’re not part of the solution, you’re part 
of the problem; it’ll all come out in the 
wash; take things as they come; two heads 
are better than one; when all you have is a 
hammer, everything looks like a nail
procrastination
delays are dangerous; never put off until 
tomorrow what you can do today; one 
of these days is none of these days; pro-
crastination is the thief of time; there’s no 
time like the present; today is yesterday’s 
tomorrow; tomorrow never comes
professions
clergymen’s sons always turn out badly; 
the devil makes his Christmas pies of law-
yers’ tongues and clerks’ fi ngers; every 
man to his trade; he who would write 
and can’t write can surely review; let the 
cobbler stick to his last; medicine can 
prolong life, but death will seize the doc-
tor, too; once a priest, always a priest; the 
shoemaker’s child always goes barefoot; 
there are tricks in every trade; those who 
can, do; those who can’t, teach; two of a 
trade never agree
promises
jam tomorrow and jam yesterday, but 
never jam today; a man’s word is as good 
as his bond; promises, like piecrust, are 
made to be broken
promotion
be nice to people on your way up because 
you’ll meet them on your way down; 
every employee tends to rise to his level 
of incompetence; the higher the monkey 
climbs the more he shows his tail; it’s ill 
waiting for dead men’s shoes
promptness   (See also earliness)
he gives twice who gives quickly; punctual-
ity is the politeness of kings; punctuality 
is the soul of business; shoot fi rst and ask 
questions afterward; short reckonings make 
long friends; a stitch in time saves nine
property
fools build houses and wise men live in 
them; learning is better than house or 
land; men make houses, women make 
homes; when house and land are gone and 
spent, then learning is most excellent; 
who has land has war
providence  (See also God)
heaven protects children, sailors, and 
drunken men; providence is always on the 
side of the big battalions; take the goods 
the gods provide; whom the gods would 
destroy, they fi rst make mad
public opinion
the voice of the people is the voice of 
God; what everybody says must be true
Index by Theme
484
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd484   484 1/29/07   5:53:11 PM
publicity
any publicity is good publicity; good wine 
needs no bush
punctuality  See promptness
punishment
catching’s before hanging; confess and 
be hanged; crime doesn’t pay; kings have 
long arms; little thieves are hanged, but 
great ones escape; no names, no pack-
drill; spare the rod and spoil the child
quarreling  See confl ict
questions
ask a silly question and you get a silly 
answer; ask me no questions and I’ll tell 
you no lies; a civil question deserves 
a civil answer; curiosity killed the cat; 
fools ask questions that wise men cannot 
answer
raw material
garbage in, garbage out; good seed makes 
a good crop; an ill bird lays an ill egg; you 
can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear; 
you can’t make bricks without straw
reciprocity
do as you would be done by; dog does 
not eat dog; do unto others as you would 
have them do unto you; hawks will not 
pick out hawks’ eyes; love begets love; 
one good turn deserves another; one hand 
washes the other; you don’t get some-
thing for nothing; you scratch my back 
and I’ll scratch yours
reconciliation
never let the sun go down on your anger; 
the quarrel of lovers is the renewal of 
love
recreation
all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy; 
the best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, 
and Dr. Merryman; business before plea-
sure; never mix business with pleasure; 
work before play
reform
it’s never too late to mend; the leopard 
can’t change its spots; an old poacher 
makes the best gamekeeper
regret
marry in haste, repent at leisure; the obvi-
ous choice is usually a quick regret; things 
past cannot be recalled; what’s done can-
not be undone
religion  (See also God)
a believer is a songless bird in a cage; 
the better the day, the better the deed; 
the blood of the martyrs is the seed of 
the church; the church is an anvil which 
has worn out many hammers; a church 
is God between four walls; clergymen’s 
sons always turn out badly; courage is 
fear that has said its prayers; the danger 
past and God forgotten; the devil can 
cite scripture for his purpose; the devil 
gets up to the belfry by the vicar’s skirts; 
faith will move mountains; the family 
that prays together stays together; if God 
did not exist, it would be necessary to 
invent him; like people, like priest; man’s 
extremity is God’s opportunity; a man 
without a religion is a horse without a 
bridle; meat and mass never hindered 
man; the nearer the church, the farther 
from God; no penny, no paternoster; 
why should the devil have all the best 
tunes?; you can’t build a church with 
stumbling blocks; you can’t serve God 
and mammon
Index by Theme
485
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd485   485 1/29/07   5:53:11 PM
relocation
three moves are as bad as a fi re; you can’t 
shift an old tree without it dying
remedies
desperate diseases must have desperate 
remedies; fi ght fi re with fi re; like cures 
like; music hath charms to soothe the 
savage breast; an ounce of prevention is 
worth a pound of cure; patience is a rem-
edy for every sorrow; prevention is better 
than cure; the remedy may be worse than 
the disease; take a hair of the dog that 
bit you; there’s a remedy for everything 
except death; time is a great healer; what 
can’t be cured must be endured
repetition
a good tale is not the worse for being told 
twice; history repeats itself; the more 
things change, the more they stay the 
same; practice makes perfect; there’s noth-
ing new under the sun; those who cannot 
remember the past are condemned to 
repeat it; the tongue always returns to the 
sore tooth; what has happened once can 
happen again; the wheel comes full circle
replacement
one nail drives out another; one story is 
good till another is told
reputation
Caesar’s wife must be above suspicion; 
call a man a thief and he will steal; com-
mon fame is seldom to blame; the devil 
is not as black as he is painted; give a dog 
a bad name and hang him; a good name 
is better than precious ointment; a good 
name is sooner lost than won; a good 
reputation is more valuable than money; 
the good that men do lives after them; he 
that would hang his dog gives out fi rst that 
he is mad; a liar is not believed when he 
tells the truth; the lion is not so fi erce as 
he is painted; a man’s best reputation for 
the future is his record of the past; praise 
no man till he is dead
resistance
a horse can’t pull while kicking; it’s better 
to die on your feet than live on your knees
resourcefulness
love laughs at locksmiths; love will fi nd 
a way; man is the measure of all things; 
necessity is the mother of invention
respect
familiarity breeds contempt; from the 
sublime to the ridiculous is only one step; 
love your enemy, but don’t put a gun in his 
hand; love your neighbor as yourself; no 
man is a hero to his valet; a prophet is not 
without honor, save in his own country
response
ask a silly question and you get a silly 
answer; a civil question deserves a civil 
answer; silence is the fi ttest reply to folly; 
a soft answer turns away wrath
responsibility
as you make your bed, so you must lie 
in it; corporations have neither bodies 
to be punished nor souls to be damned; 
everybody’s business is nobody’s business; 
every herring must hang by its own gill; 
every man is his own worst enemy; every 
man is the architect of his own fortune; if 
every man would sweep his own doorstep 
the city would soon be clean; it takes two 
to tango; liberty is not licence; life is what 
you make it; success has many fathers, 
while failure is an orphan; they that dance 
must pay the piper
Index by Theme
486
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd486   486 1/29/07   5:53:11 PM
rest
the best doctors are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet, 
and Dr. Merryman; a change is as good 
as a rest; it’s as cheap sitting as standing; 
there’s no peace for the wicked; there’s 
no rest for the weary
retaliation  (See also revenge)
the biter is sometimes bit; even a worm 
will turn; an eye for an eye, and a tooth 
for a tooth; he who laughs last, laughs 
longest; judge not, that ye be not judged; 
people who live in glass houses shouldn’t 
throw stones; two wrongs don’t make a 
right; whosoever draws his sword against 
the prince must throw the scabbard away
retribution
curses, like chickens, come home to 
roost; ill-gotten goods never thrive; the 
mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind 
exceedingly small; what goes around, 
comes around
revenge  (See also retaliation)
the best way to get even is to forget; 
blood will have blood; don’t cut off your 
nose to spite your face; don’t get mad, 
get even; hell hath no fury like a woman 
scorned; neglect will kill an injury sooner 
than revenge; revenge is a dish best eaten 
cold; revenge is sweet
revolution
revolutions are not made with rose water; 
whosoever draws his sword against the 
prince must throw the scabbard away
reward
desert and reward seldom keep company; 
good Americans, when they die, go to 
Paris; a good dog deserves a good bone; 
the higher the tree, the sweeter the plum; 
if you pay peanuts, you get monkeys; the 
laborer is worthy of his hire; the meek 
shall inherit the earth; no good deed goes 
unpunished; none but the brave deserve 
the fair; virtue is its own reward
risk  (See also danger)
adventures are to the adventurous; a bird 
in the hand is worth two in the bush; 
don’t go near the water until you learn 
how to swim; don’t put all your eggs 
in one basket; the game is not worth 
the candle; if you don’t speculate, you 
can’t accumulate; little boats should stay 
close to shore; nothing ventured, noth-
ing gained; nought is never in danger
rulers
Caesar’s wife must be above suspicion; 
the king can do no wrong; kings have long 
arms; Nero fi ddled while Rome burned; 
uneasy lies the head that wears a crown; 
whosoever draws his sword against the 
prince must throw the scabbard away
rules
every land has its own law; the exception 
proves the rule; necessity knows no law; 
new lords, new laws; rules are made to be 
broken; there’s an exception to every rule; 
when in Rome, do as the Romans do
rumors  (See also gossip)
common fame is seldom to blame; a 
lie can go around the world and back 
again while the truth is lacing up its 
boots; there’s no smoke without fi re; 
what everybody says must be true; what 
the soldier said isn’t evidence
ruthlessness
a cat in gloves catches no mice; nice guys 
fi nish last; you can’t make an omelette 
without breaking eggs
Index by Theme
487
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd487   487 1/29/07   5:53:11 PM
sacrifi ce
gold may be bought too dear; throw out a 
sprat to catch a mackerel; you can’t make 
an omelette without breaking eggs
safety  See security
sailing
the good seaman is known in bad weather; 
he that would go to sea for pleasure would 
go to hell for a pastime; he that would 
learn to pray, let him go to sea; one hand 
for yourself and one for the ship
satisfaction
the best is the enemy of the good; enough 
is as good as a feast; go farther and fare 
worse; the good is the enemy of the best; 
half a loaf is better than no bread; if it 
ain’t broke, don’t fi x it; leave well enough 
alone; something is better than nothing
saying and doing
actions speak louder than words; all com-
mend patience, but none can endure to 
suffer; a barking dog never bites; deeds, 
not words; deeds are fruits, words are but 
leaves; do as I say, not as I do; don’t talk the 
talk if you can’t walk the walk; easier said 
than done; example is better than precept; 
fi ne words butter no parsnips; honesty is 
more praised than practiced;  the more 
said, the less done; much cry and little 
wool; much smoke, little fi re; practice 
what you preach; the road to hell is paved 
with good intentions; talk is cheap; threat-
ened men live long
seasons  See calendar
secrecy
alcohol will preserve anything but a secret; 
fi elds have eyes and woods have ears; little 
birds that can sing and won’t sing must 
be made to sing; love and a cough cannot 
be hid; never tell tales out of school; no 
names, no pack-drill; a secret is either 
too good to keep or too bad not to tell; 
a secret’s a secret until it’s told; there’s a 
skeleton in every closet; three may keep 
a secret, if two of them are dead; walls 
have ears
security
caution is the parent of safety; don’t put 
all your eggs in one basket; he that is too 
secure is not safe; the mouse that has but 
one hole is quickly taken; one hand for 
yourself and one for the ship; safe bind, safe 
fi nd; safety fi rst; there’s safety in numbers
self-centeredness
every horse thinks its own pack heaviest; a 
man wrapped up in himself makes a very 
small bundle
self-harm
don’t cut off your nose to spite your face; 
every man is his own worst enemy
self-help
every man is the architect of his own 
fortune; God helps those who help them-
selves; if you want a thing done well, do 
it yourself; if you would be well served, 
serve yourself; life is what you make it; 
put your trust in God, and keep your 
powder dry
self-interest
every man for himself and the devil take 
the hindmost; interest will not lie; a man 
is a lion in his own cause; near is my shirt, 
but nearer is my skin; self-interest is the 
rule, self-sacrifi ce the exception; take 
care of number one
Index by Theme
488
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd488   488 1/29/07   5:53:12 PM
selfi shness  See self-interest
self-knowledge
the best place for criticism is in front of 
your mirror; it takes one to know one; 
know thyself; physician, heal thyself; the 
pot calls the kettle black; sweep your own 
doorstep clean; the wearer best knows 
where the shoe pinches; a wise man is 
never less alone than when alone
selfl essness
deny self for self’s sake; self-interest is the 
rule, self-sacrifi ce the exception
self-preservation
every man for himself and God for us all; 
every man for himself and the devil take 
the hindmost; one hand for yourself and 
one for the ship; self-preservation is the 
fi rst law of nature
self-reliance
every man must skin his own skunk; every 
tub must stand on its own bottom; God 
helps those who help themselves; he trav-
els fastest who travels alone; nothing can 
bring you peace but yourself; paddle your 
own canoe; stand on your own two feet
selling  See buying and selling
sharing
share and share alike; turnabout is fair 
play; what’s yours is mine, and what’s 
mine is my own
sickness
a creaking door hangs longest; the doc-
tor is often more to be feared than the 
disease; a dry cough is the trumpeter of 
death; feed a cold and starve a fever; a 
green winter makes a fat churchyard; love 
and a cough cannot be hid; may chickens 
come cheeping
silence
children should be seen and not heard; 
keep your mouth shut and your eyes 
open; least said, soonest mended; little 
birds that can sing and won’t sing must 
be made to sing; no news is good news; a 
shut mouth catches no fl ies; silence gives 
consent; silence is golden; silence is the 
fi ttest reply to folly; speech is silver, but 
silence is golden; a still tongue makes a 
wise head; still waters run deep; there is 
a time to speak and a time to be silent; 
think before you speak; those who know 
don’t speak; those who speak don’t know; 
who knows most, speaks least; a word 
spoken is past recalling
similarity
all cats are gray in the dark; the apple 
never falls far from the tree; birds of 
a feather fl ock together; diamond cuts 
diamond; the enemy of my enemy is my 
friend; extremes meet; fi ght fi re with fi re; 
great minds think alike; it’s six of one and 
half a dozen of the other; like attracts like; 
like breeds like; like cures like; like father, 
like son; like mother, like daughter; pigs 
are pigs; take a hair of the dog that bit 
you; water seeks its own level; the wheel 
comes full circle; when Greek meets 
Greek, then comes the tug of war
size  (See also great and small; small 
things)
better a little fi re to warm us than a big 
one to burn us; big fi sh eat little fi sh; the 
bigger they are, the harder they fall; big 
is beautiful; great oaks from little acorns 
grow; it’s not the size of the dog in the 
fi ght, it’s the size of the fi ght in the dog; 
Index by Theme
489
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd489   489 1/29/07   5:53:12 PM
the larger the body, the bigger the heart; a 
little pot is soon hot; the nearer the bone, 
the sweeter the fl esh; providence is always 
on the side of the big battalions; the weak-
est go to the wall; you can’t get a quart 
into a pint pot
skepticism
believe only half of what you see and 
nothing you hear; believing has a core of 
unbelieving; seeing is believing; what’s 
new cannot be true
sleep
early to bed and early to rise, makes a man 
healthy, wealthy, and wise; night brings 
counsel; one hour’s sleep before midnight 
is worth two after; six hours’ sleep for a 
man, seven for a woman, and eight for a 
fool; sleep is the brother of death; there’ll 
be sleeping enough in the grave
slowness
fair and softly goes far in a day; life is hard 
by the yard, but by the inch life’s a cinch; 
make haste slowly; the mills of God grind 
slowly, yet they grind exceedingly small; 
one step at a time; slow and steady wins 
the race; slow but sure
small things  (See also great and small; 
size)
the best things come in small packages; 
the devil is in the details; a drowning 
man will catch at a straw; every little 
helps; for want of a nail the shoe was 
lost, for want of a shoe the horse was 
lost, and for want of a horse the rider 
was lost; it’s a sin to steal a pin; it’s bet-
ter to light one candle than curse the 
darkness; little and often fi lls the purse; 
little boats should stay close to shore; 
little drops of water, little grains of sand, 
make a mighty ocean and a pleasant land; 
little fi sh are sweet; little leaks sink the 
ship; little strokes fell great oaks; many 
a little makes a mickle; the mother of 
mischief is no bigger than a midge’s 
wing; a short horse is soon curried; a 
small gift usually gets small thanks; small 
is beautiful; straws show which way the 
wind blows; trifl es make perfection, and 
perfection is no trifl e
social interaction
be nice to people on your way up because 
you’ll meet them on your way down; 
different strokes for different folks; do as 
you would be done by; dog does not eat 
dog; do unto others as you would have 
them do unto you; fair and softly goes far 
in a day; gossip is the lifeblood of society; 
hawks will not pick out hawks’ eyes; love 
your neighbor as yourself; two’s company, 
three’s a crowd; you can catch more fl ies 
with honey than with vinegar
society
if every man would sweep his own door-
step the city would soon be clean; it takes 
a village to raise a child; love makes the 
world go round; no man is an island; one 
half of the world doesn’t know how the 
other half lives
soldiers  See armed forces
solitude
a great city, a great solitude; he travels 
fastest who travels alone; laugh and the 
world laughs with you, weep and you 
weep alone; no man is an island
sorrow
a bellowing cow soon forgets her calf; it’s a 
poor heart that never rejoices; laugh and the 
Index by Theme
490
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd490   490 1/29/07   5:53:12 PM
world laughs with you, weep and you weep 
alone; a light purse makes a heavy heart; 
misery loves company; no joy without 
annoy; patience is a remedy for every sor-
row; sin, sorrow, and work are the things 
that men can’t shirk; sing before breakfast, 
cry before night; small sorrows speak; great 
ones are silent; sorrow comes unsent for; 
Wednesday’s child is full of woe
spare time
the busiest men have the most leisure; idle 
people have the least leisure
speech  See talking
spending  (See also extravagance)
both poverty and prosperity come from 
spending money—prosperity from spend-
ing it wisely; don’t throw good money 
after bad; easy come, easy go; a fool and 
his money are soon parted; money burns 
a hole in the pocket; money is round and 
rolls away; riches have wings; spare and 
have is better than spend and crave; spare 
well and have to spend; spare when you’re 
young and spend when you’re old
sportsmanship
it’s not whether you win or lose, but how 
you play the game; don’t hit a man when 
he’s down; fair play’s a jewel
storytelling
a good tale is not the worse for being told 
twice; a tale never loses in the telling
strangeness
everybody’s queer but you and me, and 
even you are a little queer; fact is stranger 
than fi ction; truth is stranger than fi ction
strength
a chain is no stronger than its weakest 
link; might makes right; providence is 
always on the side of the big battalions; 
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle 
to the strong; the weakest go to the wall; 
wisdom goes beyond strength
stress  (See also worry)
care killed the cat; if you can’t stand 
the heat, get out of the kitchen; it’s not 
work that kills, but worry; it’s the pace 
that kills; when the going gets tough, the 
tough get going
style
it’s not what you say, but how you say it; 
the style is the man
subjectivity
beauty is in the eye of the beholder; every 
man thinks his own geese swans; love is 
blind; love is blind; friendship closes its 
eyes; a man who is his own lawyer has a 
fool for his client; men are blind in their 
own cause; nobody should be judge in his 
own cause
success
every dog has his day; a good beginning 
makes a good ending; he that will thrive 
must fi rst ask his wife; it’s better to travel 
hopefully than to arrive; let them laugh 
that win; nothing succeeds like success; 
one business begets another; the only 
place where success comes before work 
is in a dictionary; success breeds success; 
success has many fathers, while failure is 
an orphan; success is never fi nal; you can’t 
argue with success
suffering
crosses are ladders that lead to heaven; 
no pain, no gain; pride feels no pain; the 
sharper the storm, the sooner it’s over; 
there’s no pleasure without pain; we all 
Index by Theme
491
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd491   491 1/29/07   5:53:12 PM
have our cross to bear; the wearer best 
knows where the shoe pinches
suitability
every Jack has his Jill; horses for courses; 
if the shoe fi ts, wear it; never send a boy 
to do a man’s job; there’s a time and place 
for everything; to everything there is a 
season; what’s sauce for the goose is sauce 
for the gander; you can’t put a square peg 
in a round hole
superstition
dream of a funeral and you hear of a mar-
riage; help you to salt, help you to sorrow; 
if you want to live and thrive, let the spi-
der run alive; marry in May, rue for aye; 
morning dreams come true; no moon, no 
man; one for sorrow; two for mirth; three 
for a wedding; four for a birth; see a pin 
and pick it up, all the day you’ll have good 
luck; see a pin and let it lay, bad luck you’ll 
have all the day; step on a crack, break 
your mother’s back; there’s luck in odd 
numbers; things come in threes; the third 
time is the charm; touch wood; a wet May 
brings plenty of hay
surprise
nothing is certain but the unforeseen; the 
unexpected always happens; wonders will 
never cease!
surrender  See giving up
sycophancy
everybody loves a lord; he that has a full 
purse never wanted a friend; a rich man’s 
joke is always funny; wealth makes many 
friends
sympathy
better be envied than pitied; misery loves 
company; pity is akin to love; a trouble 
shared is a trouble halved
tact  (See also discretion)
least said, soonest mended; never speak 
of rope in the house of a man who has 
been hanged; an ounce of discretion is 
worth a pound of wit; a soft answer turns 
away wrath; speak not of my debts unless 
you mean to pay them; there’s a time to 
speak and a time to be silent; think all 
you speak, but speak not all you think; 
think before you speak; think much, speak 
little, and write less
tactics
all fi sh are not caught with fl ies; the fox 
preys furthest from his hole; he who fi ghts 
and runs away may live to fi ght another 
day; quit while you are ahead; soft and fair 
goes far; softly, softly, catchee monkey; 
take things as they come
taking no notice
a deaf husband and a blind wife are always 
a happy couple; the dogs bark, but the 
caravan goes on; a hungry stomach has 
no ears; love is blind; friendship closes its 
eyes; Nero fi ddled while Rome burned; 
see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil; 
there are none so blind as those who will 
not see; there are none so deaf as those 
who will not hear
talent
everybody to whom much is given, of 
him will much be required; good men are 
scarce; poets are born, not made
talking  (See also saying and doing; 
words)
a bleating sheep loses a bite; empty vessels 
make the most sound; it’s merry in hall 
when beards wag all; loose lips sink ships; 
out of the fullness of the heart the mouth 
speaks; some folks speak from experience; 
Index by Theme
492
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd492   492 1/29/07   5:53:12 PM
others, from experience, don’t speak; 
speech is silver, but silence is golden; 
think before you speak; those who know 
don’t speak; those who speak don’t know; 
a word spoken is past recalling
taste
every man after his fashion; every man to 
his taste; far-fetched and dear-bought is 
good for ladies; one man’s meat is another 
man’s poison; one man’s trash is another 
man’s treasure; tastes differ; there’s no 
accounting for tastes; there’s no disputing 
about tastes; to each his own
temptation
away goes the devil when he fi nds the 
door shut against him; the devil dances in 
an empty pocket; don’t let the fox guard 
the henhouse; forbidden fruit is sweet; the 
hole calls the thief; the hook without bait 
catches no fi sh; an open door may tempt 
a saint; opportunity makes a thief; stolen 
waters are sweet
thoroughness
don’t spoil the ship for half a penny’s 
worth of tar; in for a penny, in for a pound; 
it’s idle to swallow the cow and choke on 
the tail; leave no stone unturned; the lon-
gest way around is the shortest way home; 
never do things by halves; one might as 
well be hanged for a sheep as for a lamb
threats
a barking dog never bites; if you can’t 
bite, never show your teeth; speak softly 
and carry a big stick; threatened men 
live long
thrift  (See also frugality)
keep a thing seven years and you’ll fi nd 
a use for it; most people consider thrift 
a fi ne virtue in ancestors; a penny saved 
is a penny earned; saving is getting; see a 
pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll have 
good luck; see a pin and let it lay, bad luck 
you’ll have all the day; spare and have is 
better than spend and crave; spare well 
and have to spend; spare when you’re 
young and spend when you’re old; take 
care of the pennies and the dollars will 
take care of themselves; thrift is a great 
revenue; waste not, want not
tidiness
the house shows the owner; a place for 
everything and everything in its place; see 
a pin and pick it up, all the day you’ll have 
good luck; see a pin and let it lay, bad luck 
you’ll have all the day
time
the clock goes as it pleases the clerk; the 
day is short and the work is long; life is 
short and time is swift; lose an hour in 
the morning, chase it all day; patience is 
a remedy for every sorrow; take time by 
the forelock; time fl ies; time hangs heavy 
on idle hands; time is a great healer; time 
is money; time lost cannot be recalled; 
time works wonders; work expands so as 
to fi ll the time available for its comple-
tion; yesterday will not be called again
timeliness
everything is good in its season; there’s a 
time and place for everything; timing is 
everything; to everything there is a sea-
son; who repairs not his gutters repairs 
his whole house
tolerance
bear and forbear; give and take is fair 
play; it takes all kinds of people to make 
a world; judge not, that ye be not judged; 
Index by Theme
493
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd493   493 1/29/07   5:53:12 PM
live and let live; love your neighbor as 
yourself; to know all is to forgive all
towns
God made the country and man made the 
town; a great city, a great solitude
transience
beauty is but a blossom; the day is short 
and the work is long; hot love is soon cold; 
life is short and time is swift; the longest 
day must have an end; quickly come, 
quickly go; this, too, shall pass; time fl ies; a 
wonder lasts but nine days
travel
go abroad and you’ll hear news of home; 
good company on the road is the shortest 
cut; a rolling stone gathers no moss; Thurs-
day’s child has far to go; travel broadens the 
mind; a traveler may lie with authority
treachery  (See also betrayal)
beware of Greeks bearing gifts; it’s a fool-
ish sheep that makes the wolf his confes-
sor; save us from our friends; with friends 
like that, who needs enemies?
trees
beware of an oak, it draws the stroke; 
avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; creep 
under the thorn, it can save you from 
harm; every elm has its man; walnuts and 
pears you plant for your heirs
triviality
it’s not the end of the world; Jove but 
laughs at lover’s perjury; little things 
please little minds; wink at small faults
trouble
after a storm comes a calm; any port in 
a storm; don’t cross the bridge till you 
come to it; don’t shout until you are out 
of the woods; if you’re not part of the 
solution, you’re part of the problem; let 
sleeping dogs lie; the mother of mischief 
is no bigger than a midge’s wing; never 
trouble trouble till trouble troubles you; 
when you are in a hole, stop digging
truth  (See also honesty)
beauty is truth, truth beauty; fact is stranger 
than fi ction; facts are stubborn things; the 
greater the truth, the greater the libel; 
half the truth is often a whole lie; a liar is 
not believed when he tells the truth; a lie 
can go around the world and back again 
while the truth is lacing up its boots; many 
a true word is spoken in jest; out of the 
mouths of babes and sucklings come great 
truths; tell the truth and shame the devil; 
there’s truth in wine; the truth hurts; truth 
is stranger than fi ction; truth is the fi rst 
casualty of war; truth is truth to the end of 
the reckoning; truth lies at the bottom of 
a well; truth will out; what everybody says 
must be true
uncertainty
nothing is certain but death and taxes; 
nothing is certain but the unforeseen; 
when in doubt, do nothing
unfairness
don’t change the rules in the middle of the 
game; kissing goes by favor; might makes 
right; one law for the rich and another for 
the poor; providence is always on the side 
of the big battalions; what’s yours is mine, 
and what’s mine is my own
unity
America is a tune: it must be sung 
together; union is strength; united we 
stand, divided we fall
Index by Theme
494
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd494   494 1/29/07   5:53:12 PM
Index by Theme
495
upbringing
as the twig is bent, so is the tree inclined; 
birth is much but breeding more; it takes 
a village to raise a child; nature passes 
nurture; nurture passes nature; spare the 
rod and spoil the child
usefulness
all is fi sh that comes to the net; all is grist 
that comes to the mill; fi re is a good ser-
vant but a bad master; keep a thing seven 
years and you’ll fi nd a use for it
value
bad money drives out good; it’s a poor 
dog that’s not worth whistling for; one 
man’s trash is another man’s treasure; a 
thing you don’t want is dear at any price; 
the worth of a thing is what it will bring; 
you get what you pay for
vice
gossip is vice enjoyed vicariously; pros-
perity discovers vice; adversity, virtue
victory  (See also winning and losing)
divide and conquer; he who laughs last, 
laughs longest; in war there is no substitute 
for victory; it’s better to lose the battle and 
win the war; let them laugh that win; the 
race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the 
strong; slow and steady wins the race; to 
the victor belong the spoils; winning isn’t 
everything, it’s the only thing
violence
he who lives by the sword dies by the 
sword; revolutions are not made with 
rose water
virtue
do right and fear no man; the good die 
young; good men are scarce; the good 
that men do lives after them; he lives 
long who lives well; if you can’t be 
good, be careful; let him who is without 
sin cast the fi rst stone; nobody is per-
fect; prosperity discovers vice; adversity, 
virtue; to the pure all things are pure; 
virtue is its own reward
waiting
it’s ill waiting for dead men’s shoes; they 
also serve who only stand and wait; while 
the grass grows, the steed starves
war
a bayonet is a weapon with a worker at 
each end; truth is the fi rst casualty of war; 
war is hell; war is too important to be left 
to the generals; war will cease when men 
refuse to fi ght
warning
coming events cast their shadows before; 
the dogs bark, but the caravan goes on; 
forewarned is forearmed; a prophet is not 
without honor, save in his own country; 
threatened men live long
waste
don’t cast your pearls before swine; don’t 
throw good money after bad; haste makes 
waste; a mind is a terrible thing to waste; 
mind unemployed is mind unenjoyed; 
waste not, want not; willful waste makes 
woeful want
ways and means
all roads lead to Rome; easy does it; fi sh 
where the fi sh are; give a man enough 
rope and he’ll hang himself; go hunting 
where the ducks are; he who wills the 
end, wills the means; set a thief to catch 
a thief; softly, softly, catchee monkey; 
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd495   495 1/29/07   5:53:13 PM
Index by Theme
496
there are more ways of killing a cat than 
choking it with cream; there’s more than 
one way to skin a cat; throw out a sprat 
to catch a mackerel; where there’s a will 
there’s a way; you can catch more fl ies 
with honey than with vinegar
weakness
a chain is no stronger than its weakest 
link; if you can’t run with the big dogs, 
stay under the porch; if you can’t stand 
the heat, get out of the kitchen; the spirit 
is willing but the fl esh is weak; the thread 
breaks where it is weakest; the weakest go 
to the wall
wealth  (See also money)
better a dinner of herbs where love is 
than a stalled ox where hate is; both pov-
erty and prosperity come from spend-
ing money—prosperity from spending 
it wisely; early to bed and early to rise, 
makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise; 
give a beggar a horse and he’ll ride 
it to death; gold may be bought too 
dear; a heavy purse makes a light heart; 
he that has a full purse never wanted 
a friend; if you don’t speculate, you 
can’t accumulate; it’s better to be born 
lucky than rich; light gains make heavy 
purses; money is power; money makes 
a man; money talks; much coin, much 
care; never marry for money, but marry 
where money is; one law for the rich and 
another for the poor; prosperity discov-
ers vice; adversity, virtue; the rich get 
richer and the poor get poorer; the rich 
man has his ice in the summer and the 
poor man gets his in the winter; a rich 
man’s joke is always funny; set a beggar 
on horseback, and he’ll ride to the devil; 
wealth makes many friends; when a man’s 
single, his pockets will jingle; where bees 
are, there is honey
weather
as the day lengthens, so the cold strength-
ens; avoid an ash, it counts the fl ash; beware 
of an oak, it draws the stroke; blessed are 
the dead that the rain rains on; creep under 
the thorn, it can save you from harm; a 
dripping June sets all in tune; drought never 
bred dearth in England; a green winter 
makes a fat churchyard; happy is the bride 
that the sun shines on; long foretold, long 
last; March comes in like a lion, and goes 
out like a lamb; ne’er cast a clout till May be 
out; the north wind doth blow and we shall 
have snow; rain before seven, fi ne before 
eleven; red sky at night, sailor’s delight; red 
sky in the morning, sailors take warning; 
Robin Hood could brave all weathers but a 
thaw wind; short notice, soon past; there’s 
no such thing as bad weather, only the 
wrong clothes; a wet May brings plenty of 
hay; when the wind is in the east, ’tis nei-
ther good for man nor beast; winter fi nds 
out what summer lays up
willingness
one volunteer is worth two pressed men; 
the spirit is willing but the fl esh is weak; 
the willing horse carries the load
winning and losing  (See also victory; loss)
heads I win, tails you lose; it’s an ill wind 
that blows nobody any good; it’s not 
whether you win or lose, but how you 
play the game; nice guys fi nish last; one 
man’s loss is another man’s gain; there’s 
no great loss without some gain; what 
you lose on the swings you gain on the 
roundabouts; a winner never quits, and a 
quitter never wins; winning isn’t every-
thing, it’s the only thing; you can’t beat 
a man at his own game; you can’t beat 
somebody with nobody; you can’t win 
’em all; you win some, you lose some
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd496   496 1/29/07   5:53:13 PM
Index by Theme
497
wisdom
early to bed and early to rise, makes a 
man healthy, wealthy, and wise; experi-
ence is the mother of wisdom; it’s better 
to be happy than wise; knowledge and 
wisdom are far from being one; the older 
the wiser; an old fox is not easily snared; 
out of the mouths of babes and sucklings 
come great truths; a still tongue makes a 
wise head; wisdom goes beyond strength; 
wisdom is better than rubies; a wise man 
changes his mind, but a fool never does; 
with age comes wisdom; you can’t put an 
old head on young shoulders
wishes  See desire
women  (See also men and women)
behind every great man there is a great 
woman; far-fetched and dear-bought is 
good for ladies; the female of the species 
is deadlier than the male; the gray mare is 
the better horse; the hand that rocks the 
cradle rules the world; hell hath no fury 
like a woman scorned; he that will thrive 
must fi rst ask his wife; he that would the 
daughter win, must with the mother fi rst 
begin; a whistling woman and a crowing 
hen are neither fi t for God nor men; a 
woman’s work is never done
words  (See also talking; writing)
all words are pegs to hang ideas on; hard 
words break no bones; it’s not what you 
say, but how you say it; one picture is 
worth ten thousand words; sticks and 
stones may break my bones, but names 
will never hurt me; the tongue is not 
steel, but it cuts
work  (See also industry)
all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy; 
another day, another dollar; better to wear 
out than to rust out; business before plea-
sure; fi rst thrive and then wive; fools and 
children should never see half-done work; 
genius is one percent inspiration and ninety-
nine percent perspiration; he who does not 
work, neither should he eat; it’s all in a day’s 
work; it’s not work that kills, but worry; 
many hands make light work; Saturday’s 
child works hard for its living; a short horse 
is soon curried; sin, sorrow, and work are 
the things that men can’t shirk; a woman’s 
work is never done; work before play; work 
expands so as to fi ll the time available for its 
completion; work never hurt anybody
workers
a bad workman quarrels with his tools; a 
bayonet is a weapon with a worker at each 
end; every employee tends to rise to his 
level of incompetence; if you pay peanuts, 
you get monkeys; if you want a thing done 
well, do it yourself; if you would be well 
served, serve yourself; keep no more cats 
than will catch mice; the laborer is worthy 
of his hire; like master, like man; pay before-
hand was never well served; too many 
chiefs and not enough Indians; two boys are 
half a boy, and three boys are no boy at all; 
why keep a dog and bark yourself?
worry
action is worry’s worst enemy; care is 
no cure; care killed the cat; don’t meet 
troubles halfway; it’ll all be the same in 
a hundred years; it’s not work that kills, 
but worry; one courageous thought will 
put to fl ight a host of troubles; past cure, 
past care; suffi cient unto the day is the evil 
thereof; worry is interest paid on trouble 
before it falls due
worthlessness
garbage in, garbage out; good riddance to 
bad rubbish; ill weeds grow apace; it’s a 
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd497   497 1/29/07   5:53:13 PM
Index by Theme
498
poor dog that’s not worth whistling for; 
opportunity never knocks for persons not 
worth a rap; you can’t make a silk purse 
out of a sow’s ear
writing
a goose quill is more dangerous than a lion’s 
claw; he who would write and can’t write 
can surely review; paper bleeds little; paper 
does not blush; the pen is mightier than the 
sword; poets are born, not made; a white 
wall is the fool’s writing paper
wrongdoing
catching’s before hanging; charity covers 
a multitude of sins; cheaters never pros-
per; crime doesn’t pay; crime must be 
concealed by crime; curses, like chickens, 
come home to roost; the devil dances in 
an empty pocket; the devil fi nds work for 
idle hands to do; the devil gets up to the 
belfry by the vicar’s skirts; the dog always 
returns to his vomit; every dog is allowed 
one bite; evil doers are evil dreaders; the 
fox preys furthest from his hole; the hole 
calls the thief; an idle brain is the devil’s 
workshop; idleness is the root of all evil; 
if there were no receivers, there would 
be no thieves; ill-gotten goods never 
thrive; it’s a sin to steal a pin; lawmakers 
should not be lawbreakers; little thieves 
are hanged, but great ones escape; a man 
is innocent until proven guilty; murder 
will out; never ask pardon before you 
are accused; never do evil that good may 
come of it; offenders never pardon; an 
old poacher makes the best gamekeeper; 
old sins cast long shadows; once a thief, 
always a thief; one thief robs another; a 
postern door makes a thief; set a thief to 
catch a thief; sin, sorrow, and work are 
the things that men can’t shirk; a slice off 
a cut loaf isn’t missed; stolen waters are 
sweet; there’s a sin of omission as well 
as of commission; there’s honor among 
thieves; two wrongs don’t make a right; 
what’s got over the devil’s back is spent 
under his belly; when thieves fall out, 
honest men come by their own
youth  See age; children; premature 
death
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd498   498 1/29/07   5:53:13 PM
499
Bertram, A., and R. A. Spears, eds. NTC’s Dictionary of Proverbs and Clichés. Lincolnwood, 
Ill.: NTC Publishing Group, 1993.
Fergusson, R., and J. Law. The Penguin Dictionary of Proverbs. 2nd edition. London: Penguin 
Books, 2000.
Flavell, L., and R. Flavell. Dictionary of Proverbs and Their Origins. London: Kyle Cathie, 
2004.
Knowles, E. The Oxford Dictionary of Phrase, Saying, and Quotation. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1997.
Mieder, W., S. A. Kingsbury, and K. B. Harder, eds. A Dictionary of American Proverbs. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Oxford English Dictionary. 2nd edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Pickering, D. Cassell’s Dictionary of Proverbs. 2nd edition. London: Cassell, 2001.
Ridout, R., and C. Witting. English Proverbs Explained. London: Pan Books, 1995.
Simpson, J., and J. Speake. The Oxford Dictionary of Proverbs. 5th edition. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2004.
Titelman, G. Random House Dictionary of America’s Popular Proverbs and Sayings. 2nd edition. 
New York: Random House, 2000.
Wilson, F. P. The Oxford Dictionary of English Proverbs. 3rd edition. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1970.               
B i b l i o g r a p h y
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd499   499 1/29/07   5:53:13 PM
444-500_DictProverbs_2e_BM2.indd500   500 1/29/07   5:53:13 PM

